<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 2 Samuel 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Samuel</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S24_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S26_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S28_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S29_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S210_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S211_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S213_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S214_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S215_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S216_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S217_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S218_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S219_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S220_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S221_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S223_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='2SA.xhtml#S224_0'>24</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='S20_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Second Book of Samuel Otherwise Called the Second Book of the Kings  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S21_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="S21_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag; 
<span class="verse" id="S21_2">2&#160;</span> It came even to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and <span class='add'>so</span> it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the earth, and did obeisance. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_3">3&#160;</span> And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_4">4&#160;</span> And David said unto him, How went the matter? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also.
<span class="verse" id="S21_5">5&#160;</span> And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead? 
<span class="verse" id="S21_6">6&#160;</span> And the young man that told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen followed hard after him. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_7">7&#160;</span> And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called unto me. And I answered, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="S21_8">8&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Who <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And I answered him, I <span class='add'>am</span> an Amalekite. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_9">9&#160;</span> He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thee, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life <span class='add'>is</span> yet whole in me.
<span class="verse" id="S21_10">10&#160;</span> So I stood upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was fallen: and I took the crown that <span class='add'>was</span> upon his head, and the bracelet that <span class='add'>was</span> on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S21_11">11&#160;</span> Then David took hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise all the men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him: 
<span class="verse" id="S21_12">12&#160;</span> And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S21_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And he answered, I <span class='add'>am</span> the son of a stranger, an Amalekite. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_14">14&#160;</span> And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed? 
<span class="verse" id="S21_15">15&#160;</span> And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, <span class='add'>and</span> fall upon him. And he smote him that he died. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_16">16&#160;</span> And David said unto him, Thy blood <span class='add'>be</span> upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thee, saying, I have slain the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S21_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son: 
<span class="verse" id="S21_18">18&#160;</span>(Also he bade them teach the children of Judah <span class='add'>the use of</span> the bow: behold, <span class='add'>it is</span> written in the book of Jasher.)
<span class="verse" id="S21_19">19&#160;</span> The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty fallen! 
<span class="verse" id="S21_20">20&#160;</span> Tell <span class='add'>it</span> not in Gath, publish <span class='add'>it</span> not in the streets of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_21">21&#160;</span> Ye mountains of Gilboa, <span class='add'>let there be</span> no dew, neither <span class='add'>let there be</span> rain, upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, <span class='add'>as though he had</span> not <span class='add'>been</span> anointed with oil. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_22">22&#160;</span> From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_23">23&#160;</span> Saul and Jonathan <span class='add'>were</span> lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.
<span class="verse" id="S21_24">24&#160;</span> Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with <span class='add'>other</span> delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_25">25&#160;</span> How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, <span class='add'>thou wast</span> slain in thine high places. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_26">26&#160;</span> I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women. 
<span class="verse" id="S21_27">27&#160;</span> How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S22_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after this, that David enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_2">2&#160;</span> So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail Nabal’s wife the Carmelite. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_3">3&#160;</span> And his men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_4">4&#160;</span> And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, <span class='add'>That</span> the men of Jabesh-gilead <span class='add'>were they</span> that buried Saul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And David sent messengers unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, and said unto them, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> ye of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that ye have shewed this kindness unto your lord, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Saul, and have buried him. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_6">6&#160;</span> And now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shew kindness and truth unto you: and I also will requite you this kindness, because ye have done this thing. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_8">8&#160;</span>¶ But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul’s host, took Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim;
<span class="verse" id="S22_9">9&#160;</span> And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_10">10&#160;</span> Ish-bosheth Saul’s son <span class='add'>was</span> forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_11">11&#160;</span> And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_13">13&#160;</span> And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met together by the pool of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.
<span class="verse" id="S22_14">14&#160;</span> And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_15">15&#160;</span> Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which <span class='add'>pertained</span> to Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_16">16&#160;</span> And they caught every one his fellow by the head, and <span class='add'>thrust</span> his sword in his fellow’s side; so they fell down together: wherefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Gibeon.
<span class="verse" id="S22_17">17&#160;</span> And there was a very sore battle that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And there were three sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel <span class='add'>was as</span> light of foot as a wild roe.
<span class="verse" id="S22_19">19&#160;</span> And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.
<span class="verse" id="S22_20">20&#160;</span> Then Abner looked behind him, and said, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou Asahel? And he answered, I <span class='add'>am</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_21">21&#160;</span> And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thee hold on one of the young men, and take thee his armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from following of him.
<span class="verse" id="S22_22">22&#160;</span> And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me: wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother? 
<span class="verse" id="S22_23">23&#160;</span> Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth <span class='add'>rib</span>, that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died in the same place: and it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_24">24&#160;</span> Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that <span class='add'>lieth</span> before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one troop, and stood on the top of an hill. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_26">26&#160;</span> Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? how long shall it be then, ere thou bid the people return from following their brethren? 
<span class="verse" id="S22_27">27&#160;</span> And Joab said, <span class='add'>As</span> God liveth, unless thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from following his brother.
<span class="verse" id="S22_28">28&#160;</span> So Joab blew a trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_29">29&#160;</span> And Abner and his men walked all that night through the plain, and passed over Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_30">30&#160;</span> And Joab returned from following Abner: and when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David’s servants nineteen men and Asahel. 
<span class="verse" id="S22_31">31&#160;</span> But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner’s men, <span class='add'>so that</span> three hundred and threescore men died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S22_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which <span class='add'>was in</span> Beth-lehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and they came to Hebron at break of day.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S23_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_1">1&#160;</span> Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; 
<span class="verse" id="S23_3">3&#160;</span> And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;
<span class="verse" id="S23_4">4&#160;</span> And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital; 
<span class="verse" id="S23_5">5&#160;</span> And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David’s wife. These were born to David in Hebron. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_7">7&#160;</span> And Saul had a concubine, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and <span class='add'>Ish-bosheth</span> said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father’s concubine? 
<span class="verse" id="S23_8">8&#160;</span> Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ish-bosheth, and said, <span class='add'>Am</span> I a dog’s head, which against Judah do shew kindness this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman? 
<span class="verse" id="S23_9">9&#160;</span> So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sworn to David, even so I do to him; 
<span class="verse" id="S23_10">10&#160;</span> To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beer-sheba. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_11">11&#160;</span> And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose <span class='add'>is</span> the land? saying <span class='add'>also</span>, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand <span class='add'>shall be</span> with thee, to bring about all Israel unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And he said, Well; I will make a league with thee: but one thing I require of thee, that is, Thou shalt not see my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul’s daughter, when thou comest to see my face.
<span class="verse" id="S23_14">14&#160;</span> And David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth Saul’s son, saying, Deliver <span class='add'>me</span> my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_15">15&#160;</span> And Ish-bosheth sent, and took her from <span class='add'>her</span> husband, <span class='add'>even</span> from Phaltiel the son of Laish.
<span class="verse" id="S23_16">16&#160;</span> And her husband went with her along weeping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past <span class='add'>to be</span> king over you:
<span class="verse" id="S23_18">18&#160;</span> Now then do <span class='add'>it:</span> for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_19">19&#160;</span> And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house of Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_20">20&#160;</span> So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him a feast. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_21">21&#160;</span> And Abner said unto David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thee, and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from <span class='add'>pursuing</span> a troop, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner <span class='add'>was</span> not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_23">23&#160;</span> When Joab and all the host that <span class='add'>was</span> with him were come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_24">24&#160;</span> Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thee; why <span class='add'>is</span> it <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone? 
<span class="verse" id="S23_25">25&#160;</span> Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou doest. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_26">26&#160;</span> And when Joab was come out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, which brought him again from the well of Sirah: but David knew <span class='add'>it</span> not. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_27">27&#160;</span> And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth <span class='add'>rib</span>, that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And afterward when David heard <span class='add'>it</span>, he said, I and my kingdom <span class='add'>are</span> guiltless before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for ever from the blood of Abner the son of Ner:
<span class="verse" id="S23_29">29&#160;</span> Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on all his father’s house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an issue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staff, or that falleth on the sword, or that lacketh bread.
<span class="verse" id="S23_30">30&#160;</span> So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S23_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And David said to Joab, and to all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David <span class='add'>himself</span> followed the bier.
<span class="verse" id="S23_32">32&#160;</span> And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people wept. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_33">33&#160;</span> And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fool dieth? 
<span class="verse" id="S23_34">34&#160;</span> Thy hands <span class='add'>were</span> not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falleth before wicked men, <span class='add'>so</span> fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.
<span class="verse" id="S23_35">35&#160;</span> And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_36">36&#160;</span> And all the people took notice <span class='add'>of it</span>, and it pleased them: as whatsoever the king did pleased all the people.
<span class="verse" id="S23_37">37&#160;</span> For all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner. 
<span class="verse" id="S23_38">38&#160;</span> And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="S23_39">39&#160;</span>And I <span class='add'>am</span> this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah <span class='add'>be</span> too hard for me: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S24_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S24_1">1&#160;</span> And when Saul’s son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled. 
<span class="verse" id="S24_2">2&#160;</span> And Saul’s son had two men <span class='add'>that were</span> captains of bands: the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Beerothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Beeroth also was reckoned to Benjamin:
<span class="verse" id="S24_3">3&#160;</span> And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and were sojourners there until this day.) 
<span class="verse" id="S24_4">4&#160;</span> And Jonathan, Saul’s son, had a son <span class='add'>that was</span> lame of <span class='add'>his</span> feet. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name <span class='add'>was</span> Mephibosheth.
<span class="verse" id="S24_5">5&#160;</span> And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ish-bosheth, who lay on a bed at noon. 
<span class="verse" id="S24_6">6&#160;</span> And they came thither into the midst of the house, <span class='add'>as though</span> they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth <span class='add'>rib:</span> and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped. 
<span class="verse" id="S24_7">7&#160;</span> For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and gat them away through the plain all night. 
<span class="verse" id="S24_8">8&#160;</span> And they brought the head of Ish-bosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which sought thy life; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S24_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said unto them, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, who hath redeemed my soul out of all adversity, 
<span class="verse" id="S24_10">10&#160;</span> When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good tidings, I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who <span class='add'>thought</span> that I would have given him a reward for his tidings:
<span class="verse" id="S24_11">11&#160;</span> How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shall I not therefore now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth? 
<span class="verse" id="S24_12">12&#160;</span> And David commanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged <span class='add'>them</span> up over the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth, and buried <span class='add'>it</span> in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S25_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_1">1&#160;</span> Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> thy bone and thy flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_2">2&#160;</span> Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_3">3&#160;</span> So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and they anointed David king over Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_4">4&#160;</span>¶ David <span class='add'>was</span> thirty years old when he began to reign, <span class='add'>and</span> he reigned forty years. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_5">5&#160;</span> In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither: thinking, David cannot come in hither.
<span class="verse" id="S25_7">7&#160;</span> Nevertheless David took the strong hold of Zion: the same <span class='add'>is</span> the city of David. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_8">8&#160;</span> And David said on that day, Whosoever getteth up to the gutter, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind, <span class='add'>that are</span> hated of David’s soul, <span class='add'>he shall be chief and captain</span>. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shall not come into the house.
<span class="verse" id="S25_9">9&#160;</span> So David dwelt in the fort, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_10">10&#160;</span> And David went on, and grew great, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts <span class='add'>was</span> with him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house.
<span class="verse" id="S25_12">12&#160;</span> And David perceived that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel’s sake. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And David took <span class='add'>him</span> more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to David. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_14">14&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>be</span> the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, 
<span class="verse" id="S25_15">15&#160;</span> Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 
<span class="verse" id="S25_16">16&#160;</span> And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_17">17&#160;</span>¶ But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines came up to seek David; and David heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, and went down to the hold. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_18">18&#160;</span> The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_19">19&#160;</span> And David enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Shall I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto David, Go up: for I will doubtless deliver the Philistines into thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_20">20&#160;</span> And David came to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there, and said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
<span class="verse" id="S25_21">21&#160;</span> And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S25_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_23">23&#160;</span> And when David enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he said, Thou shalt not go up; <span class='add'>but</span> fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_24">24&#160;</span> And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> go out before thee, to smite the host of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="S25_25">25&#160;</span> And David did so, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S26_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S26_1">1&#160;</span> Again, David gathered together all <span class='add'>the</span> chosen <span class='add'>men</span> of Israel, thirty thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_2">2&#160;</span> And David arose, and went with all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is called by the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts that dwelleth <span class='add'>between</span> the cherubims.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="S26_3">3&#160;</span> And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that <span class='add'>was</span> in Gibeah: and Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart.
<span class="verse" id="S26_4">4&#160;</span> And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which <span class='add'>was</span> at Gibeah, accompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark.
<span class="verse" id="S26_5">5&#160;</span> And David and all the house of Israel played before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> on all manner of <span class='add'>instruments made of</span> fir wood, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S26_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And when they came to Nachon’s threshingfloor, Uzzah put forth <span class='add'>his hand</span> to the ark of God, and took hold of it; for the oxen shook <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S26_7">7&#160;</span> And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for <span class='add'>his</span> error; and there he died by the ark of God.
<span class="verse" id="S26_8">8&#160;</span> And David was displeased, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made a breach upon Uzzah: and he called the name of the place Perez-uzzah to this day.
<span class="verse" id="S26_9">9&#160;</span> And David was afraid of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that day, and said, How shall the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> come to me? 
<span class="verse" id="S26_10">10&#160;</span> So David would not remove the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto him into the city of David: but David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_11">11&#160;</span> And the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continued in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed Obed-edom, and all his household. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S26_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And it was told king David, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that <span class='add'>pertaineth</span> unto him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with gladness. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_13">13&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that when they that bare the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_14">14&#160;</span> And David danced before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with all <span class='add'>his</span> might; and David <span class='add'>was</span> girded with a linen ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_15">15&#160;</span> So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_16">16&#160;</span> And as the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came into the city of David, Michal Saul’s daughter looked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and she despised him in her heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S26_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And they brought in the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S26_18">18&#160;</span> And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_19">19&#160;</span> And he dealt among all the people, <span class='add'>even</span> among the whole multitude of Israel, as well to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece <span class='add'>of flesh</span>, and a flagon <span class='add'>of wine</span>. So all the people departed every one to his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S26_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!
<span class="verse" id="S26_21">21&#160;</span> And David said unto Michal, <span class='add'>It was</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which chose me before thy father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, over Israel: therefore will I play before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S26_22">22&#160;</span> And I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honour.
<span class="verse" id="S26_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S27_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S27_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the king sat in his house, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had given him rest round about from all his enemies; 
<span class="verse" id="S27_2">2&#160;</span> That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of cedar, but the ark of God dwelleth within curtains. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_3">3&#160;</span> And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine heart; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S27_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass that night, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Nathan, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="S27_5">5&#160;</span> Go and tell my servant David, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dwell in?
<span class="verse" id="S27_6">6&#160;</span> Whereas I have not dwelt in <span class='add'>any</span> house since the time that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_7">7&#160;</span>In all <span class='add'>the places</span> wherein I have walked with all the children of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of cedar?
<span class="verse" id="S27_8">8&#160;</span> Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, from following the sheep, to be ruler over my people, over Israel:
<span class="verse" id="S27_9">9&#160;</span> And I was with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thee a great name, like unto the name of the great <span class='add'>men</span> that <span class='add'>are</span> in the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S27_10">10&#160;</span> Moreover I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them any more, as beforetime, 
<span class="verse" id="S27_11">11&#160;</span> And as since the time that I commanded judges <span class='add'>to be</span> over my people Israel, and have caused thee to rest from all thine enemies. Also the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> telleth thee that he will make thee an house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S27_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And when thy days be fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_13">13&#160;</span> He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_14">14&#160;</span> I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men: 
<span class="verse" id="S27_15">15&#160;</span> But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took <span class='add'>it</span> from Saul, whom I put away before thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_16">16&#160;</span> And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_17">17&#160;</span> According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S27_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then went king David in, and sat before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he said, Who <span class='add'>am</span> I, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>? and what <span class='add'>is</span> my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? 
<span class="verse" id="S27_19">19&#160;</span> And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant’s house for a great while to come. And <span class='add'>is</span> this the manner of man, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="S27_20">20&#160;</span> And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, knowest thy servant. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_21">21&#160;</span> For thy word’s sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all these great things, to make thy servant know <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_22">22&#160;</span> Wherefore thou art great, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God: for <span class='add'>there is</span> none like thee, neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_23">23&#160;</span> And what one nation in the earth <span class='add'>is</span> like thy people, <span class='add'>even</span> like Israel, whom God went to redeem for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and terrible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redeemedst to thee from Egypt, <span class='add'>from</span> the nations and their gods? 
<span class="verse" id="S27_24">24&#160;</span> For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel <span class='add'>to be</span> a people unto thee for ever: and thou, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, art become their God. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_25">25&#160;</span> And now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish  <span class='add'>it</span> for ever, and do as thou hast said. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_26">26&#160;</span> And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S27_27">27&#160;</span> For thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee an house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="S27_28">28&#160;</span> And now, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, thou <span class='add'>art</span> that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this goodness unto thy servant: 
<span class="verse" id="S27_29">29&#160;</span> Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee: for thou, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, hast spoken <span class='add'>it:</span> and with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed for ever.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S28_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S28_1">1&#160;</span> And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took Metheg-ammah out of the hand of the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S28_2">2&#160;</span> And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive. And <span class='add'>so</span> the Moabites became David’s servants, <span class='add'>and</span> brought gifts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S28_3">3&#160;</span>¶ David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates.
<span class="verse" id="S28_4">4&#160;</span> And David took from him a thousand <span class='add'>chariots</span>, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David houghed all the chariot <span class='add'>horses</span>, but reserved of them <span class='add'>for</span> an hundred chariots.
<span class="verse" id="S28_5">5&#160;</span> And when the Syrians of Damascus came to succour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men. 
<span class="verse" id="S28_6">6&#160;</span> Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, <span class='add'>and</span> brought gifts. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> preserved David whithersoever he went. 
<span class="verse" id="S28_7">7&#160;</span> And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="S28_8">8&#160;</span> And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S28_9">9&#160;</span>¶ When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the host of Hadadezer, 
<span class="verse" id="S28_10">10&#160;</span> Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smitten him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And <span class='add'>Joram</span> brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass:
<span class="verse" id="S28_11">11&#160;</span> Which also king David did dedicate unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with the silver and gold that he had dedicated of all nations which he subdued; 
<span class="verse" id="S28_12">12&#160;</span> Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah. 
<span class="verse" id="S28_13">13&#160;</span> And David gat <span class='add'>him</span> a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the valley of salt, <span class='add'>being</span> eighteen thousand <span class='add'>men</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S28_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And he put garrisons in Edom; throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom became David’s servants. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> preserved David whithersoever he went. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S28_15">15&#160;</span> And David reigned over all Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto all his people. 
<span class="verse" id="S28_16">16&#160;</span> And Joab the son of Zeruiah <span class='add'>was</span> over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud <span class='add'>was</span> recorder;
<span class="verse" id="S28_17">17&#160;</span> And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, <span class='add'>were</span> the priests; and Seraiah <span class='add'>was</span> the scribe;
<span class="verse" id="S28_18">18&#160;</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada <span class='add'>was over</span> both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David’s sons were chief rulers.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S29_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S29_1">1&#160;</span> And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindness for Jonathan’s sake? 
<span class="verse" id="S29_2">2&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> of the house of Saul a servant whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Ziba. And when they had called him unto David, the king said unto him, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant <span class='add'>is he</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_3">3&#160;</span> And the king said, <span class='add'>Is</span> there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may shew the kindness of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, <span class='add'>which is</span> lame on <span class='add'>his</span> feet. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_4">4&#160;</span> And the king said unto him, Where <span class='add'>is</span> he? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he <span class='add'>is</span> in the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, in Lo-debar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S29_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the son of Ammiel, from Lo-debar. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_6">6&#160;</span> Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto David, he fell on his face, and did reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant!</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S29_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And David said unto him, Fear not: for I will surely shew thee kindness for Jonathan thy father’s sake, and will restore thee all the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continually. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_8">8&#160;</span> And he bowed himself, and said, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy servant, that thou shouldest look upon such a dead dog as I <span class='add'>am</span>? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S29_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then the king called to Ziba, Saul’s servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy master’s son all that pertained to Saul and to all his house. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_10">10&#160;</span> Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shall till the land for him, and thou shalt bring in <span class='add'>the fruits</span>, that thy master’s son may have food to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master’s son shall eat bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_11">11&#160;</span> Then said Ziba unto the king, According to all that my lord the king hath commanded his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, <span class='add'>said the king</span>, he shall eat at my table, as one of the king’s sons. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_12">12&#160;</span> And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Micha. And all that dwelt in the house of Ziba <span class='add'>were</span> servants unto Mephibosheth. 
<span class="verse" id="S29_13">13&#160;</span> So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continually at the king’s table; and was lame on both his feet.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S210_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S210_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after this, that the king of the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_2">2&#160;</span> Then said David, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father shewed kindness unto me. And David sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David’s servants came into the land of the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_3">3&#160;</span> And the princes of the children of Ammon said unto Hanun their lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? hath not David <span class='add'>rather</span> sent his servants unto thee, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?
<span class="verse" id="S210_4">4&#160;</span> Wherefore Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, <span class='add'>even</span> to their buttocks, and sent them away. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_5">5&#160;</span> When they told <span class='add'>it</span> unto David, he sent to meet them, because the men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and <span class='add'>then</span> return. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S210_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And when the children of Ammon saw that they stank before David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand footmen, and of king Maacah a thousand men, and of Ish-tob twelve thousand men.
<span class="verse" id="S210_7">7&#160;</span> And when David heard of <span class='add'>it</span>, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_8">8&#160;</span> And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ish-tob, and Maacah, <span class='add'>were</span> by themselves in the field. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_9">9&#160;</span> When Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice <span class='add'>men</span> of Israel, and put <span class='add'>them</span> in array against the Syrians: 
<span class="verse" id="S210_10">10&#160;</span> And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put <span class='add'>them</span> in array against the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_11">11&#160;</span> And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_12">12&#160;</span> Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do that which seemeth him good. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_13">13&#160;</span> And Joab drew nigh, and the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, unto the battle against the Syrians: and they fled before him. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_14">14&#160;</span> And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S210_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And when the Syrians saw that they were smitten before Israel, they gathered themselves together. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_16">16&#160;</span> And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that <span class='add'>were</span> beyond the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host of Hadarezer <span class='add'>went</span> before them.
<span class="verse" id="S210_17">17&#160;</span> And when it was told David, he gathered all Israel together, and passed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S210_18">18&#160;</span> And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew <span class='add'>the men of</span> seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there.
<span class="verse" id="S210_19">19&#160;</span> And when all the kings <span class='add'>that were</span> servants to Hadarezer saw that they were smitten before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Ammon any more.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S211_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, after the year was expired, at the time when kings go forth <span class='add'>to battle</span>, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried still at Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in an eveningtide, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king’s house: and from the roof he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman <span class='add'>was</span> very beautiful to look upon. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_3">3&#160;</span> And David sent and enquired after the woman. And <span class='add'>one</span> said, <span class='add'>Is</span> not this Bath-sheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?
<span class="verse" id="S211_4">4&#160;</span> And David sent messengers, and took her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleanness: and she returned unto her house.
<span class="verse" id="S211_5">5&#160;</span> And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I <span class='add'>am</span> with child. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And David sent to Joab, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_7">7&#160;</span> And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded  <span class='add'>of him</span> how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered.
<span class="verse" id="S211_8">8&#160;</span> And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king’s house, and there followed him a mess <span class='add'>of meat</span> from the king.
<span class="verse" id="S211_9">9&#160;</span> But Uriah slept at the door of the king’s house with all the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_10">10&#160;</span> And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from <span class='add'>thy</span> journey? why <span class='add'>then</span> didst thou not go down unto thine house? 
<span class="verse" id="S211_11">11&#160;</span> And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shall I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? <span class='add'>as</span> thou livest, and <span class='add'>as</span> thy soul liveth, I will not do this thing. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_12">12&#160;</span> And David said to Uriah, Tarry here to day also, and to morrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_13">13&#160;</span> And when David had called him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent <span class='add'>it</span> by the hand of Uriah. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_15">15&#160;</span> And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.
<span class="verse" id="S211_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Joab observed the city, that he assigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men <span class='add'>were</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_17">17&#160;</span> And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and there fell <span class='add'>some</span> of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hittite died also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war; 
<span class="verse" id="S211_19">19&#160;</span> And charged the messenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of telling the matters of the war unto the king, 
<span class="verse" id="S211_20">20&#160;</span> And if so be that the king’s wrath arise, and he say unto thee, Wherefore approached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shoot from the wall? 
<span class="verse" id="S211_21">21&#160;</span> Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon him from the wall, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the wall? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_22">22&#160;</span>¶ So the messenger went, and came and shewed David all that Joab had sent him for. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_23">23&#160;</span> And the messenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entering of the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_24">24&#160;</span> And the shooters shot from off the wall upon thy servants; and <span class='add'>some</span> of the king’s servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_25">25&#160;</span> Then David said unto the messenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devoureth one as well as another: make thy battle more strong against the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S211_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband. 
<span class="verse" id="S211_27">27&#160;</span> And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S212_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S212_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other poor. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_2">2&#160;</span> The rich <span class='add'>man</span> had exceeding many flocks and herds: 
<span class="verse" id="S212_3">3&#160;</span> But the poor <span class='add'>man</span> had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter.
<span class="verse" id="S212_4">4&#160;</span> And there came a traveller unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but took the poor man’s lamb, and dressed it for the man that was come to him. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_5">5&#160;</span> And David’s anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, the man that hath done this <span class='add'>thing</span> shall surely die:
<span class="verse" id="S212_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S212_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Nathan said to David, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> the man. Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul; 
<span class="verse" id="S212_8">8&#160;</span> And I gave thee thy master’s house, and thy master’s wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; and if <span class='add'>that had been</span> too little, I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_9">9&#160;</span> Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to do evil in his sight? thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and hast taken his wife <span class='add'>to be</span> thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_10">10&#160;</span> Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_11">11&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give <span class='add'>them</span> unto thy neighbour, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_12">12&#160;</span> For thou didst <span class='add'>it</span> secretly: but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_13">13&#160;</span> And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And Nathan said unto David, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_14">14&#160;</span> Howbeit, because by this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to blaspheme, the child also <span class='add'>that is</span> born unto thee shall surely die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S212_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Nathan departed unto his house. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> struck the child that Uriah’s wife bare unto David, and it was very sick. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_16">16&#160;</span> David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S212_17">17&#160;</span> And the elders of his house arose, <span class='add'>and went</span> to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?
<span class="verse" id="S212_19">19&#160;</span> But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_20">20&#160;</span> Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed <span class='add'>himself</span>, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_21">21&#160;</span> Then said his servants unto him, What thing <span class='add'>is</span> this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, <span class='add'>while it was</span> alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_22">22&#160;</span> And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell <span class='add'>whether</span> <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will be gracious to me, that the child may live? 
<span class="verse" id="S212_23">23&#160;</span> But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S212_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And David comforted Bath-sheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he called his name Solomon: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> loved him. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_25">25&#160;</span> And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S212_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and took the royal city. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_27">27&#160;</span> And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah, and have taken the city of waters. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_28">28&#160;</span> Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.
<span class="verse" id="S212_29">29&#160;</span> And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it. 
<span class="verse" id="S212_30">30&#160;</span> And he took their king’s crown from off his head, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was <span class='add'>set</span> on David’s head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance.
<span class="verse" id="S212_31">31&#160;</span> And he brought forth the people that <span class='add'>were</span> therein, and put <span class='add'>them</span> under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brickkiln: and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon. So David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S213_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_2">2&#160;</span> And Amnon was so vexed, that he fell sick for his sister Tamar; for she <span class='add'>was</span> a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do any thing to her.
<span class="verse" id="S213_3">3&#160;</span> But Amnon had a friend, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David’s brother: and Jonadab <span class='add'>was</span> a very subtil man. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_4">4&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Why <span class='add'>art</span> thou, <span class='add'>being</span> the king’s son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not tell me? And Amnon said unto him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom’s sister.
<span class="verse" id="S213_5">5&#160;</span> And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thee down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to see thee, say unto him, I pray thee, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dress the meat in my sight, that I may see <span class='add'>it</span>, and eat <span class='add'>it</span> at her hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_6">6&#160;</span>¶ So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to see him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thee, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_7">7&#160;</span> Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon’s house, and dress him meat. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_8">8&#160;</span> So Tamar went to her brother Amnon’s house; and he was laid down. And she took flour, and kneaded <span class='add'>it</span>, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes.
<span class="verse" id="S213_9">9&#160;</span> And she took a pan, and poured <span class='add'>them</span> out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out all men from me. And they went out every man from him. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_10">10&#160;</span> And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar took the cakes which she had made, and brought <span class='add'>them</span> into the chamber to Amnon her brother. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_11">11&#160;</span> And when she had brought <span class='add'>them</span> unto him to eat, he took hold of her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_12">12&#160;</span> And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this folly.
<span class="verse" id="S213_13">13&#160;</span> And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee, thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak unto the king; for he will not withhold me from thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_14">14&#160;</span> Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then Amnon hated her exceedingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her <span class='add'>was</span> greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone.
<span class="verse" id="S213_16">16&#160;</span> And she said unto him, <span class='add'>There is</span> no cause: this evil in sending me away <span class='add'>is</span> greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_17">17&#160;</span> Then he called his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this <span class='add'>woman</span> out from me, and bolt the door after her. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_18">18&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>she had</span> a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such robes were the king’s daughters <span class='add'>that were</span> virgins apparelled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours that <span class='add'>was</span> on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on crying. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_20">20&#160;</span> And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother been with thee? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he <span class='add'>is</span> thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom’s house.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_21">21&#160;</span>¶ But when king David heard of all these things, he was very wroth. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_22">22&#160;</span> And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither good nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheepshearers in Baal-hazor, which <span class='add'>is</span> beside Ephraim: and Absalom invited all the king’s sons. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_24">24&#160;</span> And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath sheepshearers; let the king, I beseech thee, and his servants go with thy servant. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_25">25&#160;</span> And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not all now go, lest we be chargeable unto thee. And he pressed him: howbeit he would not go, but blessed him. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_26">26&#160;</span> Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thee? 
<span class="verse" id="S213_27">27&#160;</span> But Absalom pressed him, that he let Amnon and all the king’s sons go with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Now Absalom had commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnon’s heart is merry with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; then kill him, fear not: have not I commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant.
<span class="verse" id="S213_29">29&#160;</span> And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king’s sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain all the king’s sons, and there is not one of them left. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_31">31&#160;</span> Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their clothes rent. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_32">32&#160;</span> And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David’s brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose <span class='add'>that</span> they have slain all the young men the king’s sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the appointment of Absalom this hath been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.
<span class="verse" id="S213_33">33&#160;</span> Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king’s sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_34">34&#160;</span> But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hill side behind him. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_35">35&#160;</span> And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king’s sons come: as thy servant said, so it is.
<span class="verse" id="S213_36">36&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king’s sons came, and lifted up their voice and wept: and the king also and all his servants wept very sore.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S213_37">37&#160;</span>¶ But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Ammihud, king of Geshur. And <span class='add'>David</span> mourned for his son every day.
<span class="verse" id="S213_38">38&#160;</span> So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years. 
<span class="verse" id="S213_39">39&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>the soul of</span> king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S214_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S214_1">1&#160;</span> Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king’s heart <span class='add'>was</span> toward Absalom. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_2">2&#160;</span> And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now mourning apparel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead: 
<span class="verse" id="S214_3">3&#160;</span> And come to the king, and speak on this manner unto him. So Joab put the words in her mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S214_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.
<span class="verse" id="S214_5">5&#160;</span> And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered, I <span class='add'>am</span> indeed a widow woman, and mine husband is dead. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_6">6&#160;</span> And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and <span class='add'>there was</span> none to part them, but the one smote the other, and slew him.
<span class="verse" id="S214_7">7&#160;</span> And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we will destroy the heir also: and so they shall quench my coal which is left, and shall not leave to my husband <span class='add'>neither</span> name nor remainder upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S214_8">8&#160;</span> And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I will give charge concerning thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_9">9&#160;</span> And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity <span class='add'>be</span> on me, and on my father’s house: and the king and his throne <span class='add'>be</span> guiltless. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_10">10&#160;</span> And the king said, Whosoever saith <span class='add'>ought</span> unto thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_11">11&#160;</span> Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S214_12">12&#160;</span> Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak <span class='add'>one</span> word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_13">13&#160;</span> And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_14">14&#160;</span> For we must needs die, and <span class='add'>are</span> as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect <span class='add'>any</span> person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expelled from him.
<span class="verse" id="S214_15">15&#160;</span> Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the king, <span class='add'>it is</span> because the people have made me afraid: and thy handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be that the king will perform the request of his handmaid. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_16">16&#160;</span> For the king will hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of the man <span class='add'>that would</span> destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_17">17&#160;</span> Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shall now be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so <span class='add'>is</span> my lord the king to discern good and bad: therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will be with thee.
<span class="verse" id="S214_18">18&#160;</span> Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_19">19&#160;</span> And the king said, <span class='add'>Is not</span> the hand of Joab with thee in all this? And the woman answered and said, <span class='add'>As</span> thy soul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmaid: 
<span class="verse" id="S214_20">20&#160;</span> To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this thing: and my lord <span class='add'>is</span> wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God, to know all <span class='add'>things</span> that <span class='add'>are</span> in the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S214_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing: go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_22">22&#160;</span> And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of his servant.
<span class="verse" id="S214_23">23&#160;</span> So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_24">24&#160;</span> And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not see my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king’s face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S214_25">25&#160;</span>¶ But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised  as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
<span class="verse" id="S214_26">26&#160;</span> And when he polled his head, (for it was at every year’s end that he polled <span class='add'>it:</span> because <span class='add'>the hair</span> was heavy on him, therefore he polled it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king’s weight. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_27">27&#160;</span> And unto Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S214_28">28&#160;</span>¶ So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king’s face. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_29">29&#160;</span> Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king; but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time, he would not come. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore he said unto his servants, See, Joab’s field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom’s servants set the field on fire.
<span class="verse" id="S214_31">31&#160;</span> Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto <span class='add'>his</span> house, and said unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire? 
<span class="verse" id="S214_32">32&#160;</span> And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thee, saying, Come hither, that I may send thee to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from Geshur? <span class='add'>it had been</span> good for me <span class='add'>to have been</span> there still: now therefore let me see the king’s face; and if there be <span class='add'>any</span> iniquity in me, let him kill me. 
<span class="verse" id="S214_33">33&#160;</span> So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed Absalom.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S215_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_2">2&#160;</span> And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate: and it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom called  unto him, and said, Of what city <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And he said, Thy servant <span class='add'>is</span> of one of the tribes of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S215_3">3&#160;</span> And Absalom said unto him, See, thy matters <span class='add'>are</span> good and right; but <span class='add'>there is</span> no man <span class='add'>deputed</span> of the king to hear thee.
<span class="verse" id="S215_4">4&#160;</span> Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice! 
<span class="verse" id="S215_5">5&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that when any man came nigh <span class='add'>to him</span> to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him, and kissed him. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_6">6&#160;</span> And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after forty years, that Absalom said unto the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in Hebron. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_8">8&#160;</span> For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring me again indeed to Jerusalem, then I will serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_9">9&#160;</span> And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_10">10&#160;</span>¶ But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_11">11&#160;</span> And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, <span class='add'>that were</span> called; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_12">12&#160;</span> And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David’s counsellor, from his city, <span class='add'>even</span> from Giloh, while he offered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continually with Absalom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_14">14&#160;</span> And David said unto all his servants that <span class='add'>were</span> with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee; for we shall not <span class='add'>else</span> escape from Absalom: make speed to depart, lest he overtake us suddenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="S215_15">15&#160;</span> And the king’s servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants <span class='add'>are ready to do</span> whatsoever my lord the king shall appoint.
<span class="verse" id="S215_16">16&#160;</span> And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the king left ten women, <span class='add'>which were</span> concubines, to keep the house.
<span class="verse" id="S215_17">17&#160;</span> And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and tarried in a place that was far off. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_18">18&#160;</span> And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men which came after him from Gath, passed on before the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Then said the king to Ittai the Gittite, Wherefore goest thou also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a stranger, and also an exile. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_20">20&#160;</span> Whereas thou camest <span class='add'>but</span> yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us? seeing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back thy brethren: mercy and truth <span class='add'>be</span> with thee.
<span class="verse" id="S215_21">21&#160;</span> And Ittai answered the king, and said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, and <span class='add'>as</span> my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant be. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_22">22&#160;</span> And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that <span class='add'>were</span> with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_23">23&#160;</span> And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed over: the king also himself passed over the brook Kidron, and all the people passed over, toward the way of the wilderness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And lo Zadok also, and all the Levites <span class='add'>were</span> with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people had done passing out of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_25">25&#160;</span> And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favour in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he will bring me again, and shew me <span class='add'>both</span> it, and his habitation: 
<span class="verse" id="S215_26">26&#160;</span> But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, <span class='add'>here am</span> I, let him do to me as seemeth good unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_27">27&#160;</span> The king said also unto Zadok the priest, <span class='add'>Art not</span> thou a seer? return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_28">28&#160;</span> See, I will tarry in the plain of the wilderness, until there come word from you to certify me. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_29">29&#160;</span> Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem: and they tarried there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And David went up by the ascent of <span class='add'>mount</span> Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefoot: and all the people that <span class='add'>was</span> with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>one</span> told David, saying, Ahithophel <span class='add'>is</span> among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S215_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, that <span class='add'>when</span> David was come to the top <span class='add'>of the mount</span>, where he worshipped God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 
<span class="verse" id="S215_33">33&#160;</span> Unto whom David said, If thou passest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden unto me: 
<span class="verse" id="S215_34">34&#160;</span> But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king; <span class='add'>as</span> I <span class='add'>have been</span> thy father’s servant hitherto, so <span class='add'>will</span> I now also <span class='add'>be</span> thy servant: then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_35">35&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>hast thou</span> not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests? therefore it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> what thing soever thou shalt hear out of the king’s house, thou shalt tell <span class='add'>it</span> to Zadok and Abiathar the priests. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_36">36&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>they have</span> there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Zadok’s <span class='add'>son</span>, and Jonathan Abiathar’s <span class='add'>son;</span> and by them ye shall send unto me every thing that ye can hear. 
<span class="verse" id="S215_37">37&#160;</span> So Hushai David’s friend came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S216_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S216_1">1&#160;</span> And when David was a little past the top <span class='add'>of the hill</span>, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two hundred <span class='add'>loaves</span> of bread, and an hundred bunches of raisins, and an hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_2">2&#160;</span> And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba said, The asses <span class='add'>be</span> for the king’s household to ride on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as be faint in the wilderness may drink. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_3">3&#160;</span> And the king said, And where <span class='add'>is</span> thy master’s son? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_4">4&#160;</span> Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine <span class='add'>are</span> all that <span class='add'>pertained</span> unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee <span class='add'>that</span> I may find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S216_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Shimei, the son of Gera: he came forth, and cursed still as he came.
<span class="verse" id="S216_6">6&#160;</span> And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David: and all the people and all the mighty men <span class='add'>were</span> on his right hand and on his left. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_7">7&#160;</span> And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial:
<span class="verse" id="S216_8">8&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou <span class='add'>art taken</span> in thy mischief, because thou <span class='add'>art</span> a bloody man.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S216_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_10">10&#160;</span> And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? so let him curse, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so? 
<span class="verse" id="S216_11">11&#160;</span> And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh  my life: how much more now <span class='add'>may this</span> Benjamite <span class='add'>do it</span>? let him alone, and let him curse; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath bidden him. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_12">12&#160;</span> It may be that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will look on mine affliction, and that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will requite me good for his cursing this day.
<span class="verse" id="S216_13">13&#160;</span> And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the hill’s side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.
<span class="verse" id="S216_14">14&#160;</span> And the king, and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, came weary, and refreshed themselves there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S216_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Absalom, and all the people the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David’s friend, was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, God save the king.
<span class="verse" id="S216_17">17&#160;</span> And Absalom said to Hushai, <span class='add'>Is</span> this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend? 
<span class="verse" id="S216_18">18&#160;</span> And Hushai said unto Absalom, Nay; but whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and this people, and all the men of Israel, choose, his will I be, and with him will I abide. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_19">19&#160;</span> And again, whom should I serve? <span class='add'>should I</span> not <span class='add'>serve</span> in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father’s presence, so will I be in thy presence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S216_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we shall do. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_21">21&#160;</span> And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father’s concubines, which he hath left to keep the house; and all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all that <span class='add'>are</span> with thee be strong. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_22">22&#160;</span> So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="S216_23">23&#160;</span> And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, <span class='add'>was</span> as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so <span class='add'>was</span> all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S217_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S217_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night: 
<span class="verse" id="S217_2">2&#160;</span> And I will come upon him while he <span class='add'>is</span> weary and weak handed, and will make him afraid: and all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> with him shall flee; and I will smite the king only: 
<span class="verse" id="S217_3">3&#160;</span> And I will bring back all the people unto thee: the man whom thou seekest <span class='add'>is</span> as if all returned: <span class='add'>so</span> all the people shall be in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_4">4&#160;</span> And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S217_5">5&#160;</span> Then said Absalom, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith.
<span class="verse" id="S217_6">6&#160;</span> And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this manner: shall we do <span class='add'>after</span> his saying? if not; speak thou.
<span class="verse" id="S217_7">7&#160;</span> And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath given <span class='add'>is</span> not good at this time.
<span class="verse" id="S217_8">8&#160;</span> For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they <span class='add'>be</span> mighty men, and they <span class='add'>be</span> chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field: and thy father <span class='add'>is</span> a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.
<span class="verse" id="S217_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some <span class='add'>other</span> place: and it will come to pass, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that whosoever heareth it will say, There is a slaughter among the people that follow Absalom.
<span class="verse" id="S217_10">10&#160;</span>And he also <span class='add'>that is</span> valiant, whose heart <span class='add'>is</span> as the heart of a lion, shall utterly melt: for all Israel knoweth that thy father <span class='add'>is</span> a mighty man, and <span class='add'>they</span> which <span class='add'>be</span> with him <span class='add'>are</span> valiant men. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore I counsel that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, as the sand that <span class='add'>is</span> by the sea for multitude; and that thou go to battle in thine own person.
<span class="verse" id="S217_12">12&#160;</span> So shall we come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falleth on the ground: and of him and of all the men that <span class='add'>are</span> with him there shall not be left so much as one. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_13">13&#160;</span> Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river, until there be not one small stone found there. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_14">14&#160;</span> And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite <span class='add'>is</span> better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had appointed to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> might bring evil upon Absalom.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S217_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counselled. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_16">16&#160;</span> Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderness, but speedily pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_17">17&#160;</span> Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz stayed by En-rogel; for they might not be seen to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they went and told king David. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_18">18&#160;</span> Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went both of them away quickly, and came to a man’s house in Bahurim, which had a well in his court; whither they went down. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_19">19&#160;</span> And the woman took and spread a covering over the well’s mouth, and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_20">20&#160;</span> And when Absalom’s servants came to the woman to the house, they said, Where <span class='add'>is</span> Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them, They be gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not find <span class='add'>them</span>, they returned to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="S217_21">21&#160;</span> And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David, and said unto David, Arise, and pass quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel counselled against you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S217_22">22&#160;</span> Then David arose, and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, and they passed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of them that was not gone over Jordan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S217_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled <span class='add'>his</span> ass, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father.
<span class="verse" id="S217_24">24&#160;</span> Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S217_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which Amasa <span class='add'>was</span> a man’s son, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Ithra an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab’s mother.
<span class="verse" id="S217_26">26&#160;</span> So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S217_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim, 
<span class="verse" id="S217_28">28&#160;</span> Brought beds, and basons, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched <span class='add'>corn</span>, and beans, and lentiles, and parched <span class='add'>pulse</span>,
<span class="verse" id="S217_29">29&#160;</span> And honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of kine, for David, and for the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, to eat: for they said, The people <span class='add'>is</span> hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderness.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S218_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S218_1">1&#160;</span> And David numbered the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_2">2&#160;</span> And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab’s brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said unto the people, I will surely go forth with you myself also. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_3">3&#160;</span> But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half of us die, will they care for us: but now <span class='add'>thou art</span> worth ten thousand of us: therefore now <span class='add'>it is</span> better that thou succour us out of the city.
<span class="verse" id="S218_4">4&#160;</span> And the king said unto them, What seemeth you best I will do. And the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by hundreds and by thousands. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_5">5&#160;</span> And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, <span class='add'>Deal</span> gently for my sake with the young man, <span class='add'>even</span> with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S218_6">6&#160;</span>¶ So the people went out into the field against  Israel: and the battle was in the wood of Ephraim; 
<span class="verse" id="S218_7">7&#160;</span> Where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand <span class='add'>men</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_8">8&#160;</span> For the battle was there scattered over the face of all the country: and the wood devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S218_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that <span class='add'>was</span> under him went away. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_10">10&#160;</span> And a certain man saw <span class='add'>it</span>, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_11">11&#160;</span> And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest <span class='add'>him</span>, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thee ten <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver, and a girdle. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_12">12&#160;</span> And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver in mine hand, <span class='add'>yet</span> would I not put forth mine hand against the king’s son: for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none <span class='add'>touch</span> the young man Absalom.
<span class="verse" id="S218_13">13&#160;</span> Otherwise I should have wrought falsehood against mine own life: for there is no matter hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself against <span class='add'>me</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_14">14&#160;</span> Then said Joab, I may not tarry thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he <span class='add'>was</span> yet alive in the midst of the oak.
<span class="verse" id="S218_15">15&#160;</span> And ten young men that bare Joab’s armour compassed about and smote Absalom, and slew him. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_16">16&#160;</span> And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel: for Joab held back the people. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_17">17&#160;</span> And they took Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wood, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and all Israel fled every one to his tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S218_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself a pillar, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the king’s dale: for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance: and he called the pillar after his own name: and it is called unto this day, Absalom’s place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S218_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath avenged him of his enemies.
<span class="verse" id="S218_20">20&#160;</span> And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king’s son is dead.
<span class="verse" id="S218_21">21&#160;</span> Then said Joab to Cushi, Go tell the king what thou hast seen. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_22">22&#160;</span> Then said Ahimaaz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let me, I pray thee, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, seeing that thou hast no tidings ready?
<span class="verse" id="S218_23">23&#160;</span>But howsoever, <span class='add'>said he</span>, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain, and overran Cushi. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_24">24&#160;</span> And David sat between the two gates: and the watchman went up to the roof over the gate unto the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold a man running alone. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_25">25&#160;</span> And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he <span class='add'>be</span> alone, <span class='add'>there is</span> tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew near. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_26">26&#160;</span> And the watchman saw another man running: and the watchman called unto the porter, and said, Behold <span class='add'>another</span> man running alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_27">27&#160;</span> And the watchman said, Me thinketh the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He <span class='add'>is</span> a good man, and cometh with good tidings.
<span class="verse" id="S218_28">28&#160;</span> And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the king, All is well. And he fell down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king.
<span class="verse" id="S218_29">29&#160;</span> And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king’s servant, and <span class='add'>me</span> thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what <span class='add'>it was</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S218_30">30&#160;</span> And the king said <span class='add'>unto him</span>, Turn aside, <span class='add'>and</span> stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still. 
<span class="verse" id="S218_31">31&#160;</span> And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath avenged thee this day of all them that rose up against thee.
<span class="verse" id="S218_32">32&#160;</span> And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise against thee to do <span class='add'>thee</span> hurt, be as <span class='add'>that</span> young man <span class='add'>is</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S218_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S219_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_1">1&#160;</span> And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weepeth and mourneth for Absalom. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_2">2&#160;</span> And the victory that day was <span class='add'>turned</span> into mourning unto all the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son.
<span class="verse" id="S219_3">3&#160;</span> And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flee in battle. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_4">4&#160;</span> But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son! 
<span class="verse" id="S219_5">5&#160;</span> And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines; 
<span class="verse" id="S219_6">6&#160;</span> In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it had pleased thee well.
<span class="verse" id="S219_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I swear by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, if thou go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night: and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.
<span class="verse" id="S219_8">8&#160;</span> Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto all the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And all the people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And all the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_10">10&#160;</span> And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, <span class='add'>even</span> to his house. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_12">12&#160;</span>Ye <span class='add'>are</span> my brethren, ye <span class='add'>are</span> my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_13">13&#160;</span> And say ye to Amasa, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continually in the room of Joab. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_14">14&#160;</span> And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as <span class='add'>the heart of</span> one man; so that they sent <span class='add'>this word</span> unto the king, Return thou, and all thy servants. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_15">15&#160;</span> So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to conduct the king over Jordan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which <span class='add'>was</span> of Bahurim, hasted and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_17">17&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_18">18&#160;</span> And there went over a ferry boat to carry over the king’s household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king, as he was come over Jordan;
<span class="verse" id="S219_19">19&#160;</span> And said unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_20">20&#160;</span> For thy servant doth know that I have sinned: therefore, behold, I am come the first this day of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_21">21&#160;</span> But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_22">22&#160;</span> And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I <span class='add'>am</span> this day king over Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king, and had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came <span class='add'>again</span> in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_25">25&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he was come to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me, Mephibosheth? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_26">26&#160;</span> And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for thy servant said, I will saddle me an ass, that I may ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant <span class='add'>is</span> lame. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_27">27&#160;</span> And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king <span class='add'>is</span> as an angel of God: do therefore <span class='add'>what is</span> good in thine eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_28">28&#160;</span>For all <span class='add'>of</span> my father’s house were but dead men before my lord the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the king?
<span class="verse" id="S219_29">29&#160;</span> And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any more of thy matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide  the land. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_30">30&#160;</span> And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_32">32&#160;</span> Now Barzillai was a very aged man, <span class='add'>even</span> fourscore years old: and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he <span class='add'>was</span> a very great man. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_33">33&#160;</span> And the king said unto Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_34">34&#160;</span> And Barzillai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem?
<span class="verse" id="S219_35">35&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> this day fourscore years old: <span class='add'>and</span> can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_36">36&#160;</span> Thy servant will go a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_37">37&#160;</span> Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, <span class='add'>and be buried</span> by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what shall seem good unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S219_38">38&#160;</span> And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good unto thee: and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, <span class='add'>that</span> will I do for thee.
<span class="verse" id="S219_39">39&#160;</span> And all the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come over, the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him; and he returned unto his own place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_40">40&#160;</span> Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him: and all the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the people of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S219_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thee away, and have brought the king, and his household, and all David’s men with him, over Jordan? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_42">42&#160;</span> And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king <span class='add'>is</span> near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this matter? have we eaten at all of the king’s <span class='add'>cost</span>? or hath he given us any gift? 
<span class="verse" id="S219_43">43&#160;</span> And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more <span class='add'>right</span> in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S220_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S220_1">1&#160;</span> And there happened to be there a man of Belial, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents, O Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_2">2&#160;</span> So every man of Israel went up from after David, <span class='add'>and</span> followed Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S220_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king took the ten women <span class='add'>his</span> concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S220_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then said the king to Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three days, and be thou here present.
<span class="verse" id="S220_5">5&#160;</span> So Amasa went to assemble <span class='add'>the men of</span> Judah: but he tarried longer than the set time which he had appointed him.
<span class="verse" id="S220_6">6&#160;</span> And David said to Abishai, Now shall Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than <span class='add'>did</span> Absalom: take thou thy lord’s servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us.
<span class="verse" id="S220_7">7&#160;</span> And there went out after him Joab’s men, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_8">8&#160;</span>When they <span class='add'>were</span> at the great stone which <span class='add'>is</span> in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Joab’s garment that he had put on was girded unto him, and upon it a girdle <span class='add'>with</span> a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and as he went forth it fell out. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_9">9&#160;</span> And Joab said to Amasa, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou in health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kiss him. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_10">10&#160;</span> But Amasa took no heed to the sword that <span class='add'>was</span> in Joab’s hand: so he smote him therewith in the fifth <span class='add'>rib</span>, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai his brother pursued  after Sheba the son of Bichri.
<span class="verse" id="S220_11">11&#160;</span> And one of Joab’s men stood by him, and said, He that favoureth Joab, and he that <span class='add'>is</span> for David, <span class='add'>let him go</span> after Joab. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_12">12&#160;</span> And Amasa wallowed in blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him stood still. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_13">13&#160;</span> When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S220_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And he went through all the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Beth-maachah, and all the Berites: and they were gathered together, and went also after him. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_15">15&#160;</span> And they came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maachah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stood in the trench: and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S220_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_17">17&#160;</span> And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou Joab? And he answered, I <span class='add'>am he</span>. Then she said unto him, Hear the words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_18">18&#160;</span> Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask <span class='add'>counsel</span> at Abel: and so they ended <span class='add'>the matter</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S220_19">19&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am one of them that are</span> peaceable <span class='add'>and</span> faithful in Israel: thou seekest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou swallow up the inheritance of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="S220_20">20&#160;</span> And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swallow up or destroy. 
<span class="verse" id="S220_21">21&#160;</span> The matter <span class='add'>is</span> not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, <span class='add'>even</span> against David: deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.
<span class="verse" id="S220_22">22&#160;</span> Then the woman went unto all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> out to Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S220_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Now Joab <span class='add'>was</span> over all the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada <span class='add'>was</span> over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites: 
<span class="verse" id="S220_24">24&#160;</span> And Adoram <span class='add'>was</span> over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud <span class='add'>was</span> recorder:
<span class="verse" id="S220_25">25&#160;</span> And Sheva <span class='add'>was</span> scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar <span class='add'>were</span> the priests: 
<span class="verse" id="S220_26">26&#160;</span> And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S221_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S221_1">1&#160;</span> Then there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered, <span class='add'>It is</span> for Saul, and for <span class='add'>his</span> bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites.
<span class="verse" id="S221_2">2&#160;</span> And the king called the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the Gibeonites <span class='add'>were</span> not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.) 
<span class="verse" id="S221_3">3&#160;</span> Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="S221_4">4&#160;</span> And the Gibeonites said unto him, We will have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt thou kill any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, <span class='add'>that</span> will I do for you.
<span class="verse" id="S221_5">5&#160;</span> And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that devised against us <span class='add'>that</span> we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel,
<span class="verse" id="S221_6">6&#160;</span> Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we will hang them up unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Gibeah of Saul, <span class='add'>whom</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did choose. And the king said, I will give <span class='add'>them</span>.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="S221_7">7&#160;</span> But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> oath that <span class='add'>was</span> between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S221_8">8&#160;</span> But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite:
<span class="verse" id="S221_9">9&#160;</span> And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hill before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and they fell <span class='add'>all</span> seven together, and were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first <span class='add'>days</span>, in the beginning of barley harvest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S221_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water dropped  upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night. 
<span class="verse" id="S221_11">11&#160;</span> And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S221_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead, which had stolen them from the street of Beth-shan, where the Philistines had hanged them, when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa: 
<span class="verse" id="S221_13">13&#160;</span> And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged. 
<span class="verse" id="S221_14">14&#160;</span> And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was intreated for the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S221_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines: and David waxed faint. 
<span class="verse" id="S221_16">16&#160;</span> And Ishbi-benob, which <span class='add'>was</span> of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear <span class='add'>weighed</span> three hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of brass in weight, he being girded with a new <span class='add'>sword</span>, thought to have slain David.
<span class="verse" id="S221_17">17&#160;</span> But Abishai the son of Zeruiah succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David sware unto him, saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S221_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass after this, that there was again a battle with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which <span class='add'>was</span> of the sons of the giant.
<span class="verse" id="S221_19">19&#160;</span> And there was again a battle in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim, a Beth-lehemite, slew <span class='add'>the brother of</span> Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear <span class='add'>was</span> like a weaver’s beam.
<span class="verse" id="S221_20">20&#160;</span> And there was yet a battle in Gath, where was a man of <span class='add'>great</span> stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant.
<span class="verse" id="S221_21">21&#160;</span> And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea the brother of David slew him.
<span class="verse" id="S221_22">22&#160;</span> These four were born to the giant in Gath, and fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S222_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S222_1">1&#160;</span> And David spake unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the words of this song in the day <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S222_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; 
<span class="verse" id="S222_3">3&#160;</span> The God of my rock; in him will I trust: <span class='add'>he is</span> my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_4">4&#160;</span> I will call on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>who is</span> worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_5">5&#160;</span> When the waves of death compassed me, the floods of ungodly men made me afraid;
<span class="verse" id="S222_6">6&#160;</span> The sorrows of hell compassed me about; the snares of death prevented me;
<span class="verse" id="S222_7">7&#160;</span> In my distress I called upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry <span class='add'>did enter</span> into his ears. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_8">8&#160;</span> Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations of heaven moved and shook, because he was wroth. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_9">9&#160;</span> There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it.
<span class="verse" id="S222_10">10&#160;</span> He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkness <span class='add'>was</span> under his feet. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_11">11&#160;</span> And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was seen upon the wings of the wind. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_12">12&#160;</span> And he made darkness pavilions round about him, dark waters, <span class='add'>and</span> thick clouds of the skies.
<span class="verse" id="S222_13">13&#160;</span> Through the brightness before him were coals of fire kindled. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_14">14&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thundered from heaven, and the most High uttered his voice. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_15">15&#160;</span> And he sent out arrows, and scattered them; lightning, and discomfited them. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_16">16&#160;</span> And the channels of the sea appeared, the foundations of the world were discovered, at the rebuking of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_17">17&#160;</span> He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of many waters;
<span class="verse" id="S222_18">18&#160;</span> He delivered me from my strong enemy, <span class='add'>and</span> from them that hated me: for they were too strong for me. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_19">19&#160;</span> They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was my stay. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_20">20&#160;</span> He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_21">21&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_22">22&#160;</span> For I have kept the ways of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have not wickedly departed from my God. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_23">23&#160;</span> For all his judgments <span class='add'>were</span> before me: and <span class='add'>as for</span> his statutes, I did not depart from them. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_24">24&#160;</span> I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="S222_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath recompensed me according to my righteousness; according to my cleanness in his eye sight.
<span class="verse" id="S222_26">26&#160;</span> With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, <span class='add'>and</span> with the upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_27">27&#160;</span> With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury.
<span class="verse" id="S222_28">28&#160;</span> And the afflicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes <span class='add'>are</span> upon the haughty, <span class='add'>that</span> thou mayest bring <span class='add'>them</span> down. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_29">29&#160;</span>For thou <span class='add'>art</span> my lamp, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will lighten my darkness.
<span class="verse" id="S222_30">30&#160;</span> For by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I leaped over a wall.
<span class="verse" id="S222_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> God, his way <span class='add'>is</span> perfect; the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> tried: he <span class='add'>is</span> a buckler to all them that trust in him.
<span class="verse" id="S222_32">32&#160;</span>For who <span class='add'>is</span> God, save the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? and who <span class='add'>is</span> a rock, save our God? 
<span class="verse" id="S222_33">33&#160;</span> God <span class='add'>is</span> my strength <span class='add'>and</span> power: and he maketh my way perfect.
<span class="verse" id="S222_34">34&#160;</span> He maketh my feet like hinds’ <span class='add'>feet:</span> and setteth me upon my high places.
<span class="verse" id="S222_35">35&#160;</span> He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms.
<span class="verse" id="S222_36">36&#160;</span> Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy gentleness hath made me great.
<span class="verse" id="S222_37">37&#160;</span> Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my feet did not slip.
<span class="verse" id="S222_38">38&#160;</span> I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not again until I had consumed them. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_39">39&#160;</span> And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not arise: yea, they are fallen under my feet. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_40">40&#160;</span> For thou hast girded me with strength to battle: them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me.
<span class="verse" id="S222_41">41&#160;</span> Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_42">42&#160;</span> They looked, but <span class='add'>there was</span> none to save; <span class='add'>even</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but he answered them not. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_43">43&#160;</span> Then did I beat them as small as the dust of the earth, I did stamp them as the mire of the street, <span class='add'>and</span> did spread them abroad. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_44">44&#160;</span> Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou hast kept me <span class='add'>to be</span> head of the heathen: a people <span class='add'>which</span> I knew not shall serve me. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_45">45&#160;</span> Strangers shall submit themselves unto me: as soon as they hear, they shall be obedient unto me.
<span class="verse" id="S222_46">46&#160;</span> Strangers shall fade away, and they shall be afraid out of their close places. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_47">47&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth; and blessed <span class='add'>be</span> my rock; and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_48">48&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>is</span> God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under me,
<span class="verse" id="S222_49">49&#160;</span> And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_50">50&#160;</span> Therefore I will give thanks unto thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, among the heathen, and I will sing praises unto thy name. 
<span class="verse" id="S222_51">51&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He is</span> the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S223_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S223_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>be</span> the last words of David. David the son of Jesse said, and the man <span class='add'>who was</span> raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sweet psalmist of Israel, said, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_2">2&#160;</span> The Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake by me, and his word <span class='add'>was</span> in my tongue. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_3">3&#160;</span> The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men <span class='add'>must be</span> just, ruling in the fear of God.
<span class="verse" id="S223_4">4&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he shall be</span> as the light of the morning, <span class='add'>when</span> the sun riseth, <span class='add'>even</span> a morning without clouds; <span class='add'>as</span> the tender grass <span class='add'>springing</span> out of the earth by clear shining after rain. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_5">5&#160;</span> Although my house <span class='add'>be</span> not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all <span class='add'>things</span>, and sure: for <span class='add'>this is</span> all my salvation, and all <span class='add'>my</span> desire, although he make <span class='add'>it</span> not to grow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S223_6">6&#160;</span>¶ But <span class='add'>the sons</span> of Belial <span class='add'>shall be</span> all of them as thorns thrust away, because they cannot be taken with hands: 
<span class="verse" id="S223_7">7&#160;</span> But the man <span class='add'>that</span> shall touch them must be fenced with iron and the staff of a spear; and they shall be utterly burned with fire in the <span class='add'>same</span> place.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S223_8">8&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>be</span> the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same <span class='add'>was</span> Adino the Eznite: <span class='add'>he lift up his spear</span> against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time.
<span class="verse" id="S223_9">9&#160;</span> And after him <span class='add'>was</span> Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, <span class='add'>one</span> of the three mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines <span class='add'>that</span> were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone away: 
<span class="verse" id="S223_10">10&#160;</span> He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to spoil. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_11">11&#160;</span> And after him <span class='add'>was</span> Shammah the son of Agee the Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where was a piece of ground full of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S223_12">12&#160;</span> But he stood in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and slew the Philistines: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> wrought a great victory. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_13">13&#160;</span> And three of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the harvest time unto the cave of Adullam: and the troop of the Philistines pitched in the valley of Rephaim.
<span class="verse" id="S223_14">14&#160;</span> And David <span class='add'>was</span> then in an hold, and the garrison of the Philistines <span class='add'>was</span> then <span class='add'>in</span> Beth-lehem. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_15">15&#160;</span> And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Beth-lehem, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the gate! 
<span class="verse" id="S223_16">16&#160;</span> And the three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem, that <span class='add'>was</span> by the gate, and took <span class='add'>it</span>, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> to David: nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_17">17&#160;</span> And he said, Be it far from me, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I should do this: <span class='add'>is not this</span> the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mighty men. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_18">18&#160;</span> And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief among three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred, <span class='add'>and</span> slew <span class='add'>them</span>, and had the name among three.
<span class="verse" id="S223_19">19&#160;</span> Was he not most honourable of three? therefore he was their captain: howbeit he attained not unto the <span class='add'>first</span> three. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_20">20&#160;</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of Kabzeel, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow:
<span class="verse" id="S223_21">21&#160;</span> And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly man: and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.
<span class="verse" id="S223_22">22&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>things</span> did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among three mighty men. 
<span class="verse" id="S223_23">23&#160;</span> He was more honourable than the thirty, but he attained not to the <span class='add'>first</span> three. And David set him over his guard.
<span class="verse" id="S223_24">24&#160;</span> Asahel the brother of Joab <span class='add'>was</span> one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_25">25&#160;</span> Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_26">26&#160;</span> Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_27">27&#160;</span> Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_28">28&#160;</span> Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_29">29&#160;</span> Heleb the son of Baanah, a Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_30">30&#160;</span> Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash,
<span class="verse" id="S223_31">31&#160;</span> Abi-albon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_32">32&#160;</span> Eliahba the Shaalbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_33">33&#160;</span> Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_34">34&#160;</span> Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maachathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_35">35&#160;</span> Hezrai the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_36">36&#160;</span> Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_37">37&#160;</span> Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armourbearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_38">38&#160;</span> Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite, 
<span class="verse" id="S223_39">39&#160;</span> Uriah the Hittite: thirty and seven in all.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S224_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S224_1">1&#160;</span> And again the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_2">2&#160;</span> For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which <span class='add'>was</span> with him, Go now through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the people.
<span class="verse" id="S224_3">3&#160;</span> And Joab said unto the king, Now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God add unto the people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of my lord the king may see <span class='add'>it:</span> but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing? 
<span class="verse" id="S224_4">4&#160;</span> Notwithstanding the king’s word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S224_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And they passed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side of the city that <span class='add'>lieth</span> in the midst of the river of Gad, and toward Jazer:
<span class="verse" id="S224_6">6&#160;</span> Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtim-hodshi; and they came to Dan-jaan, and about to Zidon,
<span class="verse" id="S224_7">7&#160;</span> And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites: and they went out to the south of Judah, <span class='add'>even</span> to Beer-sheba. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_8">8&#160;</span> So when they had gone through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_9">9&#160;</span> And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah <span class='add'>were</span> five hundred thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S224_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And David’s heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. And David said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I have sinned greatly in that I have done: and now, I beseech thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, take away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_11">11&#160;</span> For when David was up in the morning, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto the prophet Gad, David’s seer, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="S224_12">12&#160;</span> Go and say unto David, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I offer thee three <span class='add'>things;</span> choose  thee one of them, that I may <span class='add'>do it</span> unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_13">13&#160;</span> So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shall seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land? or wilt thou flee three months before thine enemies, while they pursue thee? or that there be three days’ pestilence in thy land? now advise, and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_14">14&#160;</span> And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall now into the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for his mercies <span class='add'>are</span> great: and let me not fall into the hand of man.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S224_15">15&#160;</span>¶ So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba seventy thousand men. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_16">16&#160;</span> And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite.
<span class="verse" id="S224_17">17&#160;</span> And David spake unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S224_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite.
<span class="verse" id="S224_19">19&#160;</span> And David, according to the saying of Gad, went up as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_20">20&#160;</span> And Araunah looked, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on his face upon the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_21">21&#160;</span> And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshingfloor of thee, to build an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that the plague may be stayed from the people. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_22">22&#160;</span> And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and offer up what <span class='add'>seemeth</span> good unto him: behold, <span class='add'>here be</span> oxen for burnt sacrifice, and threshing instruments and <span class='add'>other</span> instruments of the oxen for wood. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_23">23&#160;</span>All these <span class='add'>things</span> did Araunah, <span class='add'>as</span> a king, give unto the king. And Araunah said unto the king, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God accept  thee. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_24">24&#160;</span> And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I will surely buy <span class='add'>it</span> of thee at a price: neither will I offer burnt offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the threshingfloor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="S224_25">25&#160;</span> And David built there an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was intreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
