<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE 1 Kings 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Kings</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K15_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K16_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K17_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K113_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K115_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K121_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='1KI.xhtml#K122_0'>22</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='K10_0'>

<div class='mt'>The First Book of the Kings </div>
<div class='mt2'>Commonly Called the Third Book of the Kings  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K11_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="K11_1">1&#160;</span> Now king David was old <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stricken in years; and they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat.
<span class="verse" id="K11_2">2&#160;</span> Wherefore his servants said unto him, <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Let there be sought for my lord the king <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat.
<span class="verse" id="K11_3">3&#160;</span> So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the coasts of Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite, and brought her to the king.
<span class="verse" id="K11_4">4&#160;</span> And the damsel <span class='add'>was</span> very fair, and cherished the king, and ministered to him: but the king knew her not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.
<span class="verse" id="K11_6">6&#160;</span> And his father had not displeased him <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at any time in saying, Why hast thou done so? and he also <span class='add'>was a</span> very goodly <span class='add'>man;</span> and <span class='add'>his mother</span> bare him after Absalom.
<span class="verse" id="K11_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest: and they <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>following Adonijah helped <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K11_8">8&#160;</span> But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which <span class='add'>belonged</span> to David, were not with Adonijah.
<span class="verse" id="K11_9">9&#160;</span> And Adonijah slew sheep and oxen and fat cattle by the stone of Zoheleth, which <span class='add'>is</span> by <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>En-rogel, and called all his brethren the king’s sons, and all the men of Judah the king’s servants:
<span class="verse" id="K11_10">10&#160;</span> But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Haggith doth reign, and David our lord knoweth <span class='add'>it</span> not?
<span class="verse" id="K11_12">12&#160;</span> Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K11_13">13&#160;</span> Go and get thee in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign?
<span class="verse" id="K11_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>confirm thy words.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Bath-sheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite ministered unto the king.
<span class="verse" id="K11_16">16&#160;</span> And Bath-sheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the king said, <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>What wouldest thou?
<span class="verse" id="K11_17">17&#160;</span> And she said unto him, My lord, thou swarest by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God unto thine handmaid, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.
<span class="verse" id="K11_18">18&#160;</span> And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king, thou knowest <span class='add'>it</span> not:
<span class="verse" id="K11_19">19&#160;</span> And he hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy servant hath he not called.
<span class="verse" id="K11_20">20&#160;</span> And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of all Israel <span class='add'>are</span> upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
<span class="verse" id="K11_21">21&#160;</span> Otherwise it shall come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be counted <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offenders.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet also came in.
<span class="verse" id="K11_23">23&#160;</span> And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.
<span class="verse" id="K11_24">24&#160;</span> And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
<span class="verse" id="K11_25">25&#160;</span> For he is gone down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat cattle and sheep in abundance, and hath called all the king’s sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink before him, and say, <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>God save king Adonijah.
<span class="verse" id="K11_26">26&#160;</span>But me, <span class='add'>even</span> me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not called.
<span class="verse" id="K11_27">27&#160;</span> Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed <span class='add'>it</span> unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Then king David answered and said, Call me Bath-sheba. And she came <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>into the king’s presence, and stood before the king.
<span class="verse" id="K11_29">29&#160;</span> And the king sware, and said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, that hath redeemed my soul out of all distress,
<span class="verse" id="K11_30">30&#160;</span> Even as I sware unto thee by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.
<span class="verse" id="K11_31">31&#160;</span> Then Bath-sheba bowed with <span class='add'>her</span> face to the earth, and did reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king.
<span class="verse" id="K11_33">33&#160;</span> The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon:
<span class="verse" id="K11_34">34&#160;</span> And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save king Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K11_35">35&#160;</span> Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K11_36">36&#160;</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Amen: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of my lord the king say so <span class='add'>too</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K11_37">37&#160;</span> As the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath been with my lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.
<span class="verse" id="K11_38">38&#160;</span> So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David’s mule, and brought him to Gihon.
<span class="verse" id="K11_39">39&#160;</span> And Zadok the priest took an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and all the people said, God save king Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K11_40">40&#160;</span> And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And Adonijah and all the guests that <span class='add'>were</span> with him heard <span class='add'>it</span> as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, Wherefore <span class='add'>is this</span> noise of the city being in an uproar?
<span class="verse" id="K11_42">42&#160;</span> And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came: and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a valiant man, and bringest good tidings.
<span class="verse" id="K11_43">43&#160;</span> And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king David hath made Solomon king.
<span class="verse" id="K11_44">44&#160;</span> And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king’s mule:
<span class="verse" id="K11_45">45&#160;</span> And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This <span class='add'>is</span> the noise that ye have heard.
<span class="verse" id="K11_46">46&#160;</span> And also Solomon sitteth on the throne of the kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="K11_47">47&#160;</span> And moreover the king’s servants came to bless our lord king David, saying, God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed.
<span class="verse" id="K11_48">48&#160;</span> And also thus said the king, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, which hath given <span class='add'>one</span> to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even seeing <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K11_49">49&#160;</span> And all the guests that <span class='add'>were</span> with Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K11_50">50&#160;</span>¶ And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
<span class="verse" id="K11_51">51&#160;</span> And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me to day that he will not slay his servant with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="K11_52">52&#160;</span> And Solomon said, If he will shew himself a worthy man, there shall not an hair of him fall to the earth: but if wickedness shall be found in him, he shall die.
<span class="verse" id="K11_53">53&#160;</span> So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto him, Go to thine house.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K12_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_1">1&#160;</span> Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K12_2">2&#160;</span> I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew thyself a man;
<span class="verse" id="K12_3">3&#160;</span> And keep the charge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself:
<span class="verse" id="K12_4">4&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> may continue his word which he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>there shall not <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fail thee (said he) a man on the throne of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K12_5">5&#160;</span> Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, <span class='add'>and</span> what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Abner the son of Ner, and unto <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle that <span class='add'>was</span> about his loins, and in his shoes that <span class='add'>were</span> on his feet.
<span class="verse" id="K12_6">6&#160;</span> Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace.
<span class="verse" id="K12_7">7&#160;</span> But shew kindness unto the sons of <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.
<span class="verse" id="K12_8">8&#160;</span>And, behold, <span class='add'>thou hast</span> with thee <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim: but he came down to meet me at Jordan, and I sware to him by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will not put thee to death with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="K12_9">9&#160;</span> Now therefore hold him not guiltless: for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a wise man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blood.
<span class="verse" id="K12_10">10&#160;</span> So <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David.
<span class="verse" id="K12_11">11&#160;</span> And the days that David <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>reigned over Israel <span class='add'>were</span> forty years: seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three years reigned he in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established greatly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bath-sheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.
<span class="verse" id="K12_14">14&#160;</span> He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thee. And she said, Say on.
<span class="verse" id="K12_15">15&#160;</span> And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and <span class='add'>that</span> all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother’s: for it was his from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K12_16">16&#160;</span> And now I ask one petition of thee, <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deny me not. And she said unto him, Say on.
<span class="verse" id="K12_17">17&#160;</span> And he said, Speak, I pray thee, unto Solomon the king, (for he will not say thee nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.
<span class="verse" id="K12_18">18&#160;</span> And Bath-sheba said, Well; I will speak for thee unto the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Bath-sheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the king’s mother; and she sat on his right hand.
<span class="verse" id="K12_20">20&#160;</span> Then she said, I desire one small petition of thee; <span class='add'>I pray thee</span>, say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I will not say thee nay.
<span class="verse" id="K12_21">21&#160;</span> And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.
<span class="verse" id="K12_22">22&#160;</span> And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he <span class='add'>is</span> mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.
<span class="verse" id="K12_23">23&#160;</span> Then king Solomon sware by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life.
<span class="verse" id="K12_24">24&#160;</span>Now therefore, <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, which hath established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house, as he <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day.
<span class="verse" id="K12_25">25&#160;</span> And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he fell upon him that he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>worthy of death: but I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou barest the ark of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> before David my father, and because thou hast been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.
<span class="verse" id="K12_27">27&#160;</span> So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; that he might <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fulfil the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
<span class="verse" id="K12_29">29&#160;</span> And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and, behold, <span class='add'>he is</span> by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.
<span class="verse" id="K12_30">30&#160;</span> And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said unto him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.
<span class="verse" id="K12_31">31&#160;</span> And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and fall upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the innocent blood, which Joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father.
<span class="verse" id="K12_32">32&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall return his blood upon his own head, who fell upon two men more righteous and better than he, and slew them with the sword, my father David not knowing <span class='add'>thereof, to wit</span>, <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K12_33">33&#160;</span> Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever: but upon David, and upon his seed, and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K12_34">34&#160;</span> So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the room of Abiathar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K12_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Build thee an house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth thence any whither.
<span class="verse" id="K12_37">37&#160;</span>For it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> on the day thou goest out, and passest over the brook Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely die: thy blood shall be upon thine own head.
<span class="verse" id="K12_38">38&#160;</span> And Shimei said unto the king, The saying <span class='add'>is</span> good: as my lord the king hath said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.
<span class="verse" id="K12_39">39&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Maachah king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants <span class='add'>be</span> in Gath.
<span class="verse" id="K12_40">40&#160;</span> And Shimei arose, and saddled his ass, and went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath.
<span class="verse" id="K12_41">41&#160;</span> And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again.
<span class="verse" id="K12_42">42&#160;</span> And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I not make thee to swear by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and protested unto thee, saying, Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word <span class='add'>that</span> I have heard <span class='add'>is</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="K12_43">43&#160;</span> Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?
<span class="verse" id="K12_44">44&#160;</span> The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest all the wickedness which thine heart is privy to, that thou didst to David my father: therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall return thy wickedness upon thine own head;
<span class="verse" id="K12_45">45&#160;</span> And king Solomon <span class='add'>shall be</span> blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for ever.
<span class="verse" id="K12_46">46&#160;</span> So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went out, and fell upon him, that he died. And the <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K13_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K13_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh’s daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.
<span class="verse" id="K13_2">2&#160;</span> Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house built unto the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, until those days.
<span class="verse" id="K13_3">3&#160;</span> And Solomon loved the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, walking in the statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places.
<span class="verse" id="K13_4">4&#160;</span> And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that <span class='add'>was</span> the great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>upon that altar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K13_5">5&#160;</span>¶ In Gibeon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.
<span class="verse" id="K13_6">6&#160;</span> And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my father great <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="K13_7">7&#160;</span> And now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father: and I <span class='add'>am but</span> a little child: I know not <span class='add'>how</span> to go out or come in.
<span class="verse" id="K13_8">8&#160;</span> And thy servant <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.
<span class="verse" id="K13_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Give therefore thy servant an <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?
<span class="verse" id="K13_10">10&#160;</span> And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.
<span class="verse" id="K13_11">11&#160;</span> And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to discern judgment;
<span class="verse" id="K13_12">12&#160;</span> Behold, I have done according to thy <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="K13_13">13&#160;</span> And I have also <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honour: so that there <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy days.
<span class="verse" id="K13_14">14&#160;</span> And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days.
<span class="verse" id="K13_15">15&#160;</span> And Solomon awoke; and, behold, <span class='add'>it was</span> a dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a feast to all his servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K13_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then came there two women, <span class='add'>that were</span> harlots, unto the king, and stood before him.
<span class="verse" id="K13_17">17&#160;</span> And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house.
<span class="verse" id="K13_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also: and we <span class='add'>were</span> together; <span class='add'>there was</span> no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house.
<span class="verse" id="K13_19">19&#160;</span> And this woman’s child died in the night; because she overlaid it.
<span class="verse" id="K13_20">20&#160;</span> And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.
<span class="verse" id="K13_21">21&#160;</span> And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, which I did bear.
<span class="verse" id="K13_22">22&#160;</span> And the other woman said, Nay; but the living <span class='add'>is</span> my son, and the dead <span class='add'>is</span> thy son. And this said, No; but the dead <span class='add'>is</span> thy son, and the living <span class='add'>is</span> my son. Thus they spake before the king.
<span class="verse" id="K13_23">23&#160;</span> Then said the king, The one saith, This <span class='add'>is</span> my son that liveth, and thy son <span class='add'>is</span> the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son <span class='add'>is</span> the dead, and my son <span class='add'>is</span> the living.
<span class="verse" id="K13_24">24&#160;</span> And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before the king.
<span class="verse" id="K13_25">25&#160;</span> And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.
<span class="verse" id="K13_26">26&#160;</span> Then spake the woman whose the living child <span class='add'>was</span> unto the king, for her bowels <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, <span class='add'>but</span> divide <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K13_27">27&#160;</span> Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she <span class='add'>is</span> the mother thereof.
<span class="verse" id="K13_28">28&#160;</span> And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in him, to do judgment.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K14_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K14_1">1&#160;</span> So king Solomon was king over all Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K14_2">2&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>were</span> the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the priest,
<span class="verse" id="K14_3">3&#160;</span> Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>recorder.
<span class="verse" id="K14_4">4&#160;</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada <span class='add'>was</span> over the host: and Zadok and Abiathar <span class='add'>were</span> the priests:
<span class="verse" id="K14_5">5&#160;</span> And Azariah the son of Nathan <span class='add'>was</span> over the officers: and Zabud the son of Nathan <span class='add'>was</span> principal officer, <span class='add'>and</span> the king’s friend:
<span class="verse" id="K14_6">6&#160;</span> And Ahishar <span class='add'>was</span> over the household: and <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Adoniram the son of Abda <span class='add'>was</span> over the <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>tribute.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K14_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel, which provided victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year made provision.
<span class="verse" id="K14_8">8&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> their names: <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim:
<span class="verse" id="K14_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Beth-shemesh, and Elon-beth-hanan:
<span class="verse" id="K14_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him <span class='add'>pertained</span> Sochoh, and all the land of Hepher:
<span class="verse" id="K14_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The son of Abinadab, in all the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
<span class="verse" id="K14_12">12&#160;</span> Baana the son of Ahilud; <span class='add'>to him pertained</span> Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth-shean, which <span class='add'>is</span> by Zartanah beneath Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, <span class='add'>even</span> unto <span class='add'>the place that is</span> beyond Jokneam:
<span class="verse" id="K14_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The son of Geber, in Ramoth-gilead; to him <span class='add'>pertained</span> the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which <span class='add'>are</span> in Gilead; to him <span class='add'>also pertained</span> the region of Argob, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Bashan, threescore great cities with walls and brasen bars:
<span class="verse" id="K14_14">14&#160;</span> Ahinadab the son of Iddo <span class='add'>had</span> <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Mahanaim:
<span class="verse" id="K14_15">15&#160;</span> Ahimaaz <span class='add'>was</span> in Naphtali; he also took Basmath the daughter of Solomon to wife:
<span class="verse" id="K14_16">16&#160;</span> Baanah the son of Hushai <span class='add'>was</span> in Asher and in Aloth:
<span class="verse" id="K14_17">17&#160;</span> Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar:
<span class="verse" id="K14_18">18&#160;</span> Shimei the son of Elah, in Benjamin:
<span class="verse" id="K14_19">19&#160;</span> Geber the son of Uri <span class='add'>was</span> in the country of Gilead, <span class='add'>in</span> the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, and of Og king of Bashan; and <span class='add'>he was</span> the only officer which <span class='add'>was</span> in the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K14_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Judah and Israel <span class='add'>were</span> many, as the sand which <span class='add'>is</span> by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry.
<span class="verse" id="K14_21">21&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K14_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon’s <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>provision for one day was thirty <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>measures of fine flour, and threescore measures of meal,
<span class="verse" id="K14_23">23&#160;</span> Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred sheep, beside harts, and roebucks, and fallowdeer, and fatted fowl.
<span class="verse" id="K14_24">24&#160;</span> For he had dominion over all <span class='add'>the region</span> on this side the river, from Tiphsah even to Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river: and he had peace on all sides round about him.
<span class="verse" id="K14_25">25&#160;</span> And Judah and Israel dwelt <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K14_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="K14_27">27&#160;</span> And those officers provided victual for king Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon’s table, every man in his month: they lacked nothing.
<span class="verse" id="K14_28">28&#160;</span> Barley also and straw for the horses and <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dromedaries brought they unto the place where <span class='add'>the officers</span> were, every man according to his charge.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K14_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that <span class='add'>is</span> on the sea shore.
<span class="verse" id="K14_30">30&#160;</span> And Solomon’s wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="K14_31">31&#160;</span> For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round about.
<span class="verse" id="K14_32">32&#160;</span> And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five.
<span class="verse" id="K14_33">33&#160;</span> And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that <span class='add'>is</span> in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.
<span class="verse" id="K14_34">34&#160;</span> And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K15_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K15_1">1&#160;</span> And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the room of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David.
<span class="verse" id="K15_2">2&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K15_3">3&#160;</span> Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> put them under the soles of his feet.
<span class="verse" id="K15_4">4&#160;</span> But now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God hath given me rest on every side, <span class='add'>so that there is</span> neither adversary nor evil occurrent.
<span class="verse" id="K15_5">5&#160;</span> And, behold, I <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>purpose to build an house unto the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall build an house unto my name.
<span class="verse" id="K15_6">6&#160;</span> Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedar trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants: and unto thee will I give hire for thy servants according to all that thou shalt <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>appoint: for thou knowest that <span class='add'>there is</span> not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K15_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people.
<span class="verse" id="K15_8">8&#160;</span> And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>considered the things which thou sentest to me for: <span class='add'>and</span> I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.
<span class="verse" id="K15_9">9&#160;</span> My servants shall bring <span class='add'>them</span> down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I will convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>appoint me, and will cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive <span class='add'>them:</span> and thou shalt accomplish my desire, in giving food for my household.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K15_10">10&#160;</span> So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trees and fir trees <span class='add'>according to</span> all his desire.
<span class="verse" id="K15_11">11&#160;</span> And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>measures of wheat <span class='add'>for</span> food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.
<span class="verse" id="K15_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave Solomon wisdom, <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as he promised him: and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K15_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And king Solomon raised a <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>levy out of all Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.
<span class="verse" id="K15_14">14&#160;</span> And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, <span class='add'>and</span> two months at home: and <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Adoniram <span class='add'>was</span> over the levy.
<span class="verse" id="K15_15">15&#160;</span> And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains;
<span class="verse" id="K15_16">16&#160;</span> Beside the chief of Solomon’s officers which <span class='add'>were</span> over the work, three thousand and three hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work.
<span class="verse" id="K15_17">17&#160;</span> And the king commanded, and they brought great stones, costly stones, <span class='add'>and</span> hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house.
<span class="verse" id="K15_18">18&#160;</span> And Solomon’s builders and Hiram’s builders did hew <span class='add'>them</span>, and the <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K16_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it came to pass in the four hundred and <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon’s reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which <span class='add'>is</span> the second month, that he <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>began to build the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K16_2">2&#160;</span> And the house which king Solomon built for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the length thereof <span class='add'>was</span> threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty <span class='add'>cubits</span>, and the height thereof thirty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="K16_3">3&#160;</span> And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the length thereof, according to the breadth of the house; <span class='add'>and</span> ten cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the breadth thereof before the house.
<span class="verse" id="K16_4">4&#160;</span> And for the house he made <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>windows of narrow lights.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>against the wall of the house he built <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>chambers round about, <span class='add'>against</span> the walls of the house round about, <span class='add'>both</span> of the temple and of the oracle: and he made <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>chambers round about:
<span class="verse" id="K16_6">6&#160;</span> The nethermost chamber <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits broad, and the middle <span class='add'>was</span> six cubits broad, and the third <span class='add'>was</span> seven cubits broad: for without <span class='add'>in the wall</span> of the house he made <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>narrowed rests round about, that <span class='add'>the beams</span> should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
<span class="verse" id="K16_7">7&#160;</span> And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither hammer nor axe <span class='add'>nor</span> any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building.
<span class="verse" id="K16_8">8&#160;</span> The door for the middle chamber <span class='add'>was</span> in the right <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>side of the house: and they went up with winding stairs into the middle <span class='add'>chamber</span>, and out of the middle into the third.
<span class="verse" id="K16_9">9&#160;</span> So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with beams and boards of cedar.
<span class="verse" id="K16_10">10&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>then</span> he built chambers against all the house, five cubits high: and they rested on the house <span class='add'>with</span> timber of cedar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Solomon, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K16_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Concerning</span> this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all my commandments to walk in them; then will I perform my word with thee, <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which I spake unto David thy father:
<span class="verse" id="K16_13">13&#160;</span> And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K16_14">14&#160;</span> So Solomon built the house, and finished it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_15">15&#160;</span> And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar, <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>both the floor of the house, and the walls of the cieling: <span class='add'>and</span> he covered <span class='add'>them</span> on the inside with wood, and covered the floor of the house with planks of fir.
<span class="verse" id="K16_16">16&#160;</span> And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the floor and the walls with boards of cedar: he even built <span class='add'>them</span> for it within, <span class='add'>even</span> for the oracle, <span class='add'>even</span> for the most holy <span class='add'>place</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K16_17">17&#160;</span> And the house, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the temple before it, was forty cubits <span class='add'>long</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K16_18">18&#160;</span> And the cedar of the house within <span class='add'>was</span> carved with <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>knops and <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>open flowers: all <span class='add'>was</span> cedar; there was no stone seen.
<span class="verse" id="K16_19">19&#160;</span> And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K16_20">20&#160;</span> And the oracle in the forepart <span class='add'>was</span> twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and he overlaid it with <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pure gold; and <span class='add'>so</span> covered the altar <span class='add'>which was of</span> cedar.
<span class="verse" id="K16_21">21&#160;</span> So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid it with gold.
<span class="verse" id="K16_22">22&#160;</span> And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished all the house: also the whole altar that <span class='add'>was</span> by the oracle he overlaid with gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And within the oracle he made two cherubims <span class='add'>of</span> <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>olive tree, <span class='add'>each</span> ten cubits high.
<span class="verse" id="K16_24">24&#160;</span> And five cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost part of the one wing unto the uttermost part of the other <span class='add'>were</span> ten cubits.
<span class="verse" id="K16_25">25&#160;</span> And the other cherub <span class='add'>was</span> ten cubits: both the cherubims <span class='add'>were</span> of one measure and one size.
<span class="verse" id="K16_26">26&#160;</span> The height of the one cherub <span class='add'>was</span> ten cubits, and so <span class='add'>was it</span> of the other cherub.
<span class="verse" id="K16_27">27&#160;</span> And he set the cherubims within the inner house: and <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>they stretched forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the one touched the <span class='add'>one</span> wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house.
<span class="verse" id="K16_28">28&#160;</span> And he overlaid the cherubims with gold.
<span class="verse" id="K16_29">29&#160;</span> And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubims and palm trees and <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>open flowers, within and without.
<span class="verse" id="K16_30">30&#160;</span> And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, within and without. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And for the entering of the oracle he made doors <span class='add'>of</span> olive tree: the lintel <span class='add'>and</span> side posts <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a fifth part <span class='add'>of the wall</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K16_32">32&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>two doors also <span class='add'>were of</span> olive tree; and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trees and <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>open flowers, and overlaid <span class='add'>them</span> with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trees.
<span class="verse" id="K16_33">33&#160;</span> So also made he for the door of the temple posts <span class='add'>of</span> olive tree, <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a fourth part <span class='add'>of the wall</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K16_34">34&#160;</span> And the two doors <span class='add'>were of</span> fir tree: the two leaves of the one door <span class='add'>were</span> folding, and the two leaves of the other door <span class='add'>were</span> folding.
<span class="verse" id="K16_35">35&#160;</span> And he carved <span class='add'>thereon</span> cherubims and palm trees and open flowers: and covered <span class='add'>them</span> with gold fitted upon the carved work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And he built the inner court with three rows of hewed stone, and a row of cedar beams. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K16_37">37&#160;</span>¶ In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> laid, in the month Zif:
<span class="verse" id="K16_38">38&#160;</span> And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which <span class='add'>is</span> the eighth month, was the house finished <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>throughout all the parts thereof, and according to all the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K17_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_1">1&#160;</span> But Solomon was building his own house <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thirteen years, and he finished all his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_2">2&#160;</span>¶ He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length thereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.
<span class="verse" id="K17_3">3&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>it was</span> covered with cedar above upon the <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>beams, that <span class='add'>lay</span> on forty five pillars, fifteen <span class='add'>in</span> a row.
<span class="verse" id="K17_4">4&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> windows <span class='add'>in</span> three rows, and <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>light <span class='add'>was</span> against light <span class='add'>in</span> three ranks.
<span class="verse" id="K17_5">5&#160;</span> And all the <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>doors and posts <span class='add'>were</span> square, with the windows: and light <span class='add'>was</span> against light <span class='add'>in</span> three ranks.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And he made a porch of pillars; the length thereof <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>before them: and the <span class='add'>other</span> pillars and the thick beam <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>before them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, <span class='add'>even</span> the porch of judgment: and <span class='add'>it was</span> covered with cedar <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from one side of the floor to the other.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And his house where he dwelt <span class='add'>had</span> another court within the porch, <span class='add'>which</span> was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh’s daughter, <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whom he had taken <span class='add'>to wife</span>, like unto this porch.
<span class="verse" id="K17_9">9&#160;</span>All these <span class='add'>were of</span> costly stones, according to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and <span class='add'>so</span> on the outside toward the great court.
<span class="verse" id="K17_10">10&#160;</span> And the foundation <span class='add'>was of</span> costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.
<span class="verse" id="K17_11">11&#160;</span> And above <span class='add'>were</span> costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones, and cedars.
<span class="verse" id="K17_12">12&#160;</span> And the great court round about <span class='add'>was</span> with three rows of hewed stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the inner court of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the porch of the house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.
<span class="verse" id="K17_14">14&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a widow’s son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father <span class='add'>was</span> a man of Tyre, a worker in brass: and he was filled with wisdom, and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.
<span class="verse" id="K17_15">15&#160;</span> For he <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast two pillars of brass, of eighteen cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about.
<span class="verse" id="K17_16">16&#160;</span> And he made two chapiters <span class='add'>of</span> molten brass, to set upon the tops of the pillars: the height of the one chapiter <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits, and the height of the other chapiter <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits:
<span class="verse" id="K17_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which <span class='add'>were</span> upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter.
<span class="verse" id="K17_18">18&#160;</span> And he made the pillars, and two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the chapiters that <span class='add'>were</span> upon the top, with pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter.
<span class="verse" id="K17_19">19&#160;</span> And the chapiters that <span class='add'>were</span> upon the top of the pillars <span class='add'>were</span> of lily work in the porch, four cubits.
<span class="verse" id="K17_20">20&#160;</span> And the chapiters upon the two pillars <span class='add'>had pomegranates</span> also above, over against the belly which <span class='add'>was</span> by the network: and the pomegranates <span class='add'>were</span> two hundred in rows round about upon the other chapiter.
<span class="verse" id="K17_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he set up the pillars in the porch of the temple: and he set up the right pillar, and called the name thereof <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jachin: and he set up the left pillar, and called the name thereof <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Boaz.
<span class="verse" id="K17_22">22&#160;</span> And upon the top of the pillars <span class='add'>was</span> lily work: so was the work of the pillars finished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And he made a molten sea, ten cubits <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the one brim to the other: <span class='add'>it was</span> round all about, and his height <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits: and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
<span class="verse" id="K17_24">24&#160;</span> And under the brim of it round about <span class='add'>there were</span> knops compassing it, ten in a cubit, <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>compassing the sea round about: the knops <span class='add'>were</span> cast in two rows, when it was cast.
<span class="verse" id="K17_25">25&#160;</span> It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea <span class='add'>was set</span> above upon them, and all their hinder parts <span class='add'>were</span> inward.
<span class="verse" id="K17_26">26&#160;</span>And it <span class='add'>was</span> an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained two thousand baths. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And he made ten bases of brass; four cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and three cubits the height of it.
<span class="verse" id="K17_28">28&#160;</span> And the work of the bases <span class='add'>was</span> on this <span class='add'>manner:</span> they had borders, and the borders <span class='add'>were</span> between the ledges:
<span class="verse" id="K17_29">29&#160;</span> And on the borders that <span class='add'>were</span> between the ledges <span class='add'>were</span> lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the ledges <span class='add'>there was</span> a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen <span class='add'>were</span> certain additions made of thin work.
<span class="verse" id="K17_30">30&#160;</span> And every base had four brasen wheels, and plates of brass: and the four corners thereof had undersetters: under the laver <span class='add'>were</span> undersetters molten, at the side of every addition.
<span class="verse" id="K17_31">31&#160;</span> And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above <span class='add'>was</span> a cubit: but the mouth thereof <span class='add'>was</span> round <span class='add'>after</span> the work of the base, a cubit and an half: and also upon the mouth of it <span class='add'>were</span> gravings with their borders, foursquare, not round.
<span class="verse" id="K17_32">32&#160;</span> And under the borders <span class='add'>were</span> four wheels; and the axletrees of the wheels <span class='add'>were <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>joined</span> to the base: and the height of a wheel <span class='add'>was</span> a cubit and half a cubit.
<span class="verse" id="K17_33">33&#160;</span> And the work of the wheels <span class='add'>was</span> like the work of a chariot wheel: their axletrees, and their naves, and their felloes, and their spokes, <span class='add'>were</span> all molten.
<span class="verse" id="K17_34">34&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> four undersetters to the four corners of one base: <span class='add'>and</span> the undersetters <span class='add'>were</span> of the very base itself.
<span class="verse" id="K17_35">35&#160;</span> And in the top of the base <span class='add'>was there</span> a round compass of half a cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the borders thereof <span class='add'>were</span> of the same.
<span class="verse" id="K17_36">36&#160;</span> For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trees, according to the <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>proportion of every one, and additions round about.
<span class="verse" id="K17_37">37&#160;</span>After this <span class='add'>manner</span> he made the ten bases: all of them had one casting, one measure, <span class='add'>and</span> one size. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_38">38&#160;</span>¶ Then made he ten lavers of brass: one laver contained forty baths: <span class='add'>and</span> every laver was four cubits: <span class='add'>and</span> upon every one of the ten bases one laver.
<span class="verse" id="K17_39">39&#160;</span> And he put five bases on the right <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward over against the south.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_40">40&#160;</span>¶ And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he made king Solomon for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="K17_41">41&#160;</span> The two pillars, and the <span class='add'>two</span> bowls of the chapiters that <span class='add'>were</span> on the top of the two pillars; and the two networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which <span class='add'>were</span> upon the top of the pillars;
<span class="verse" id="K17_42">42&#160;</span> And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, <span class='add'>even</span> two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>upon the pillars;
<span class="verse" id="K17_43">43&#160;</span> And the ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases;
<span class="verse" id="K17_44">44&#160;</span> And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea;
<span class="verse" id="K17_45">45&#160;</span> And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and all these vessels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>were of</span> <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bright brass.
<span class="verse" id="K17_46">46&#160;</span> In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarthan.
<span class="verse" id="K17_47">47&#160;</span> And Solomon left all the vessels <span class='add'>unweighed</span>, <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>because they were exceeding many: neither was the weight of the brass <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>found out.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K17_48">48&#160;</span> And Solomon made all the vessels that <span class='add'>pertained</span> unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the shewbread <span class='add'>was</span>,
<span class="verse" id="K17_49">49&#160;</span> And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right <span class='add'>side</span>, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs <span class='add'>of</span> gold,
<span class="verse" id="K17_50">50&#160;</span> And the bowls, and the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>censers <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold; and the hinges <span class='add'>of</span> gold, <span class='add'>both</span> for the doors of the inner house, the most holy <span class='add'>place, and</span> for the doors of the house, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, of the temple.
<span class="verse" id="K17_51">51&#160;</span> So was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And Solomon brought in the <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>things <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which David his father had dedicated; <span class='add'>even</span> the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, did he put among the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K18_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_1">1&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> out of the city of David, which <span class='add'>is</span> Zion.
<span class="verse" id="K18_2">2&#160;</span> And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, which <span class='add'>is</span> the seventh month.
<span class="verse" id="K18_3">3&#160;</span> And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.
<span class="verse" id="K18_4">4&#160;</span> And they brought up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that <span class='add'>were</span> in the tabernacle, even those did the priests and the Levites bring up.
<span class="verse" id="K18_5">5&#160;</span> And king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled unto him, <span class='add'>were</span> with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude.
<span class="verse" id="K18_6">6&#160;</span> And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy <span class='add'>place, even</span> under the wings of the cherubims.
<span class="verse" id="K18_7">7&#160;</span> For the cherubims spread forth <span class='add'>their</span> two wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above.
<span class="verse" id="K18_8">8&#160;</span> And they drew out the staves, that the <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ends of the staves were seen out in the <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>holy <span class='add'>place</span> before the oracle, and they were not seen without: and there they are unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="K18_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There was</span> nothing in the ark <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made <span class='add'>a covenant</span> with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="K18_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, that the cloud <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>filled the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>,
<span class="verse" id="K18_11">11&#160;</span> So that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had filled the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then spake Solomon, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.
<span class="verse" id="K18_13">13&#160;</span> I have surely built thee an house to dwell in, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever.
<span class="verse" id="K18_14">14&#160;</span> And the king turned his face about, and blessed all the congregation of Israel: (and all the congregation of Israel stood;)
<span class="verse" id="K18_15">15&#160;</span> And he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, which spake with his mouth unto David my father, and hath with his hand fulfilled <span class='add'>it</span>, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K18_16">16&#160;</span> Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build an house, that my name might be therein; but I chose <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>David to be over my people Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K18_17">17&#160;</span> And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K18_18">18&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst well that it was in thine heart.
<span class="verse" id="K18_19">19&#160;</span> Nevertheless thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my name.
<span class="verse" id="K18_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath performed his word that he spake, and I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> promised, and have built an house for the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K18_21">21&#160;</span> And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein <span class='add'>is</span> the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon stood before <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven:
<span class="verse" id="K18_23">23&#160;</span> And he said, <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, <span class='add'>there is</span> no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all their heart:
<span class="verse" id="K18_24">24&#160;</span> Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled <span class='add'>it</span> with thine hand, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="K18_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore now, <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him, saying, <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>so that thy children take heed to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked before me.
<span class="verse" id="K18_26">26&#160;</span> And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.
<span class="verse" id="K18_27">27&#160;</span> But will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded?
<span class="verse" id="K18_28">28&#160;</span> Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thee to day:
<span class="verse" id="K18_29">29&#160;</span> That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, <span class='add'>even</span> toward the place of which thou hast said, <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My name shall be there: that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shall make <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>toward this place.
<span class="verse" id="K18_30">30&#160;</span> And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>toward this place: and hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place: and when thou hearest, forgive.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_31">31&#160;</span>¶ If any man trespass against his neighbour, <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house:
<span class="verse" id="K18_32">32&#160;</span> Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_33">33&#160;</span>¶ When thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray, and make supplication unto thee <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in this house:
<span class="verse" id="K18_34">34&#160;</span> Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest unto their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_35">35&#160;</span>¶ When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou afflictest them:
<span class="verse" id="K18_36">36&#160;</span> Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_37">37&#160;</span>¶ If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, <span class='add'>or</span> if there be caterpiller; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness <span class='add'>there be;</span>
<span class="verse" id="K18_38">38&#160;</span> What prayer and supplication soever be <span class='add'>made</span> by any man, <span class='add'>or</span> by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:
<span class="verse" id="K18_39">39&#160;</span> Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou, <span class='add'>even</span> thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of men;)
<span class="verse" id="K18_40">40&#160;</span> That they may fear thee all the days that they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.
<span class="verse" id="K18_41">41&#160;</span> Moreover concerning a stranger, that <span class='add'>is</span> not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name’s sake;
<span class="verse" id="K18_42">42&#160;</span>(For they shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched out arm;) when he shall come and pray toward this house;
<span class="verse" id="K18_43">43&#160;</span> Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for: that all people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as <span class='add'>do</span> thy people Israel; and that they may know that <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>this house, which I have builded, is called by thy name.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_44">44&#160;</span>¶ If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>toward the city which thou hast chosen, and <span class='add'>toward</span> the house that I have built for thy name:
<span class="verse" id="K18_45">45&#160;</span> Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cause.
<span class="verse" id="K18_46">46&#160;</span> If they sin against thee, (<a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for <span class='add'>there is</span> no man that sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near;
<span class="verse" id="K18_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> if they shall <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in the land of them that carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness;
<span class="verse" id="K18_48">48&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>so</span> return unto thee with all their heart, and with all their soul, in the land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name:
<span class="verse" id="K18_49">49&#160;</span> Then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling place, and maintain their <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cause,
<span class="verse" id="K18_50">50&#160;</span> And forgive thy people that have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before them who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them:
<span class="verse" id="K18_51">51&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>be</span> thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron:
<span class="verse" id="K18_52">52&#160;</span> That thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant, and unto the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in all that they call for unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="K18_53">53&#160;</span> For thou didst separate them from among all the people of the earth, <span class='add'>to be</span> thine inheritance, <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as thou spakest by the hand of Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_54">54&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he arose from before the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up to heaven.
<span class="verse" id="K18_55">55&#160;</span> And he stood, and blessed all the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K18_56">56&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that hath given rest unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there hath not <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant.
<span class="verse" id="K18_57">57&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us:
<span class="verse" id="K18_58">58&#160;</span> That he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, which he commanded our fathers.
<span class="verse" id="K18_59">59&#160;</span> And let these my words, wherewith I have made supplication before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, be nigh unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at all times, as the matter shall require:
<span class="verse" id="K18_60">60&#160;</span> That all the people of the earth may know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> God, <span class='add'>and that there is</span> none else.
<span class="verse" id="K18_61">61&#160;</span> Let your heart therefore be perfect with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K18_62">62&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K18_63">63&#160;</span> And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K18_64">64&#160;</span><a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The same day did the king hallow the middle of the court that <span class='add'>was</span> before the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for there he offered burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings: because the brasen altar that <span class='add'>was</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> too little to receive the burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings.
<span class="verse" id="K18_65">65&#160;</span> And at that time Solomon held a feast, and all Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, seven days and seven days, <span class='add'>even</span> fourteen days.
<span class="verse" id="K18_66">66&#160;</span> On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blessed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had done for David his servant, and for Israel his people.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K19_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K19_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the king’s house, and all Solomon’s desire which he was pleased to do,
<span class="verse" id="K19_2">2&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared to Solomon the second time, <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as he had appeared unto him at Gibeon.
<span class="verse" id="K19_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, that thou hast made before me: I have hallowed this house, which thou hast built, <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually.
<span class="verse" id="K19_4">4&#160;</span> And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, <span class='add'>and</span> wilt keep my statutes and my judgments:
<span class="verse" id="K19_5">5&#160;</span> Then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K19_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> if ye shall at all turn from following me, ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments <span class='add'>and</span> my statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them:
<span class="verse" id="K19_7">7&#160;</span> Then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have hallowed <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for my name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all people:
<span class="verse" id="K19_8">8&#160;</span> And at this house, <span class='add'>which</span> is high, every one that passeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall say, <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Why hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> done thus unto this land, and to this house?
<span class="verse" id="K19_9">9&#160;</span> And they shall answer, Because they forsook the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other gods, and have worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought upon them all this evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K19_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it came to pass at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had built the two houses, the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the king’s house,
<span class="verse" id="K19_11">11&#160;</span>(<span class='add'>Now</span> Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire,) that then <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
<span class="verse" id="K19_12">12&#160;</span> And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him; and they <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleased him not.
<span class="verse" id="K19_13">13&#160;</span> And he said, What cities <span class='add'>are</span> these which thou hast given me, my brother? And he called them the land of <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Cabul unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="K19_14">14&#160;</span> And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K19_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is</span> the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for to build the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.
<span class="verse" id="K19_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>For</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that dwelt in the city, and given it <span class='add'>for</span> a present unto his daughter, Solomon’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="K19_17">17&#160;</span> And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon the nether,
<span class="verse" id="K19_18">18&#160;</span> And Baalath, and Tadmor in the wilderness, in the land,
<span class="verse" id="K19_19">19&#160;</span> And all the cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and cities for his horsemen, and <a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that which Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
<span class="verse" id="K19_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> all the people <span class='add'>that were</span> left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which <span class='add'>were</span> not of the children of Israel,
<span class="verse" id="K19_21">21&#160;</span> Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were not able utterly to destroy, upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="K19_22">22&#160;</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>make no bondmen: but they <span class='add'>were</span> men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="K19_23">23&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> the chief of the officers that <span class='add'>were</span> over Solomon’s work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that wrought in the work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K19_24">24&#160;</span>¶ But <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pharaoh’s daughter came up out of the city of David unto her house which <span class='add'>Solomon</span> had built for her: then did he build Millo. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K19_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And three times in a year did Solomon offer burnt offerings and peace offerings upon the altar which he built unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he burnt incense <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>upon the altar that <span class='add'>was</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. So he finished the house.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K19_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which <span class='add'>is</span> beside Eloth, on the <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom.
<span class="verse" id="K19_27">27&#160;</span> And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K19_28">28&#160;</span> And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> to king Solomon.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K110_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_1">1&#160;</span> And when the <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, she came to prove him with hard questions.
<span class="verse" id="K110_2">2&#160;</span> And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart.
<span class="verse" id="K110_3">3&#160;</span> And Solomon told her all her <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>questions: there was not <span class='add'>any</span> thing hid from the king, which he told her not.
<span class="verse" id="K110_4">4&#160;</span> And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, and the house that he had built,
<span class="verse" id="K110_5">5&#160;</span> And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; there was no more spirit in her.
<span class="verse" id="K110_6">6&#160;</span> And she said to the king, It was a true <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>report that I heard in mine own land of thy <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>acts and of thy wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="K110_7">7&#160;</span> Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen <span class='add'>it:</span> and, behold, the half was not told me: <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.
<span class="verse" id="K110_8">8&#160;</span> Happy <span class='add'>are</span> thy men, happy <span class='add'>are</span> these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, <span class='add'>and</span> that hear thy wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="K110_9">9&#160;</span> Blessed be the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel: because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee king, to do judgment and justice.
<span class="verse" id="K110_10">10&#160;</span> And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K110_11">11&#160;</span> And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious stones.
<span class="verse" id="K110_12">12&#160;</span> And the king made of the almug trees <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pillars for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the king’s house, harps also and psalteries for singers: there came no such <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>almug trees, nor were seen unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="K110_13">13&#160;</span> And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside <span class='add'>that</span> which Solomon gave her <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of his royal bounty. So she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred threescore and six talents of gold,
<span class="verse" id="K110_15">15&#160;</span>Beside <span class='add'>that he had</span> of the merchantmen, and of the traffick of the spice merchants, and of all the kings of Arabia, and of the <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>governors of the country.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And king Solomon made two hundred targets <span class='add'>of</span> beaten gold: six hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of gold went to one target.
<span class="verse" id="K110_17">17&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he made</span> three hundred shields <span class='add'>of</span> beaten gold; three pound of gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>house of the forest of Lebanon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the best gold.
<span class="verse" id="K110_19">19&#160;</span> The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne <span class='add'>was</span> round <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>behind: and <span class='add'>there were</span> <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stays on either side on the place of the seat, and two lions stood beside the stays.
<span class="verse" id="K110_20">20&#160;</span> And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps: there was not <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the like made in any kingdom.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And all king Solomon’s drinking vessels <span class='add'>were of</span> gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon <span class='add'>were of</span> pure gold; <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>none <span class='add'>were of</span> silver: it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K110_22">22&#160;</span> For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram: once in three years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
<span class="verse" id="K110_23">23&#160;</span> So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And all the earth <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
<span class="verse" id="K110_25">25&#160;</span> And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_26">26&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="K110_27">27&#160;</span> And the king <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made silver <span class='add'>to be</span> in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he <span class='add'>to be</span> as the sycomore trees that <span class='add'>are</span> in the vale, for abundance.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K110_28">28&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.
<span class="verse" id="K110_29">29&#160;</span> And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, did they bring <span class='add'>them</span> out <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by their means.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K111_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K111_1">1&#160;</span> But king Solomon loved <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>many strange women, <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, <span class='add'>and</span> Hittites;
<span class="verse" id="K111_2">2&#160;</span> Of the nations <span class='add'>concerning</span> which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto the children of Israel, <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you: <span class='add'>for</span> surely they will turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love.
<span class="verse" id="K111_3">3&#160;</span> And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart.
<span class="verse" id="K111_4">4&#160;</span> For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, <span class='add'>that</span> his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, as <span class='add'>was</span> the heart of David his father.
<span class="verse" id="K111_5">5&#160;</span> For Solomon went after <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
<span class="verse" id="K111_6">6&#160;</span> And Solomon did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>went not fully after the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as <span class='add'>did</span> David his father.
<span class="verse" id="K111_7">7&#160;</span> Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hill that <span class='add'>is</span> before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon.
<span class="verse" id="K111_8">8&#160;</span> And likewise did he for all his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K111_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which had appeared unto him twice,
<span class="verse" id="K111_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods: but he kept not that which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded.
<span class="verse" id="K111_11">11&#160;</span> Wherefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is done of thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.
<span class="verse" id="K111_12">12&#160;</span> Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy father’s sake: <span class='add'>but</span> I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
<span class="verse" id="K111_13">13&#160;</span> Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; <span class='add'>but</span> will give one tribe to thy son for David my servant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake which I have chosen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K111_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite: he <span class='add'>was</span> of the king’s seed in Edom.
<span class="verse" id="K111_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had smitten every male in Edom;
<span class="verse" id="K111_16">16&#160;</span>(For six months did Joab remain there with all Israel, until he had cut off every male in Edom:)
<span class="verse" id="K111_17">17&#160;</span> That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father’s servants with him, to go into Egypt; Hadad <span class='add'>being</span> yet a little child.
<span class="verse" id="K111_18">18&#160;</span> And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt; which gave him an house, and appointed him victuals, and gave him land.
<span class="verse" id="K111_19">19&#160;</span> And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.
<span class="verse" id="K111_20">20&#160;</span> And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh’s house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh’s household among the sons of Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="K111_21">21&#160;</span> And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country.
<span class="verse" id="K111_22">22&#160;</span> Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seekest to go to thine own country? And he answered, <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K111_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And God stirred him up <span class='add'>another</span> adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah:
<span class="verse" id="K111_24">24&#160;</span> And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when David slew them <span class='add'>of Zobah:</span> and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus.
<span class="verse" id="K111_25">25&#160;</span> And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, beside the mischief that Hadad <span class='add'>did:</span> and he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K111_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon’s servant, whose mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted up <span class='add'>his</span> hand against the king.
<span class="verse" id="K111_27">27&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>was</span> the cause that he lifted up <span class='add'>his</span> hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>repaired the breaches of the city of David his father.
<span class="verse" id="K111_28">28&#160;</span> And the man Jeroboam <span class='add'>was</span> a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing the young man that he <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>was industrious, he made him ruler over all the <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>charge of the house of Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="K111_29">29&#160;</span> And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two <span class='add'>were</span> alone in the field:
<span class="verse" id="K111_30">30&#160;</span> And Ahijah caught the new garment that <span class='add'>was</span> on him, and rent it <span class='add'>in</span> twelve pieces:
<span class="verse" id="K111_31">31&#160;</span> And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces: for thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee:
<span class="verse" id="K111_32">32&#160;</span>(But he shall have one tribe for my servant David’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:)
<span class="verse" id="K111_33">33&#160;</span> Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not walked in my ways, to do <span class='add'>that which is</span> right in mine eyes, and <span class='add'>to keep</span> my statutes and my judgments, as <span class='add'>did</span> David his father.
<span class="verse" id="K111_34">34&#160;</span> Howbeit I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I will make him prince all the days of his life for David my servant’s sake, whom I chose, because he kept my commandments and my statutes:
<span class="verse" id="K111_35">35&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will take the kingdom out of his son’s hand, and will give it unto thee, <span class='add'>even</span> ten tribes.
<span class="verse" id="K111_36">36&#160;</span> And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen me to put my name there.
<span class="verse" id="K111_37">37&#160;</span> And I will take thee, and thou shalt reign according to all that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K111_38">38&#160;</span> And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do <span class='add'>that is</span> right in my sight, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did; that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="K111_39">39&#160;</span> And I will for this afflict the seed of David, but not for ever.
<span class="verse" id="K111_40">40&#160;</span> Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K111_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And the rest of the <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
<span class="verse" id="K111_42">42&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>forty years.
<span class="verse" id="K111_43">43&#160;</span> And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father: and <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K112_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K112_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to make him king.
<span class="verse" id="K112_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet in <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Egypt, heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, (for he was fled from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;)
<span class="verse" id="K112_3">3&#160;</span> That they sent and called him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and spake unto Rehoboam, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K112_4">4&#160;</span> Thy father made our <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.
<span class="verse" id="K112_5">5&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Depart yet <span class='add'>for</span> three days, then come again to me. And the people departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K112_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that I may answer this people?
<span class="verse" id="K112_7">7&#160;</span> And they spake unto him, saying, If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever.
<span class="verse" id="K112_8">8&#160;</span> But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, <span class='add'>and</span> which stood before him:
<span class="verse" id="K112_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto them, What counsel give ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter?
<span class="verse" id="K112_10">10&#160;</span> And the young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou <span class='add'>it</span> lighter unto us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little <span class='add'>finger</span> shall be thicker than my father’s loins.
<span class="verse" id="K112_11">11&#160;</span> And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K112_12">12&#160;</span>¶ So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king had appointed, saying, Come to me again the third day.
<span class="verse" id="K112_13">13&#160;</span> And the king answered the people <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>roughly, and forsook the old men’s counsel that they gave him;
<span class="verse" id="K112_14">14&#160;</span> And spake to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke: my father <span class='add'>also</span> chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.
<span class="verse" id="K112_15">15&#160;</span> Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause was from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he might perform his saying, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K112_16">16&#160;</span>¶ So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? neither <span class='add'>have we</span> inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto their tents.
<span class="verse" id="K112_17">17&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for</span> the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
<span class="verse" id="K112_18">18&#160;</span> Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who <span class='add'>was</span> over the tribute; and all Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king Rehoboam <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="K112_19">19&#160;</span> So Israel <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rebelled against the house of David unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="K112_20">20&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and called him unto the congregation, and made him king over all Israel: there was none that followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>only. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K112_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="K112_22">22&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K112_23">23&#160;</span> Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K112_24">24&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and returned to depart, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K112_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and went out from thence, and built Penuel.
<span class="verse" id="K112_26">26&#160;</span> And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom return to the house of David:
<span class="verse" id="K112_27">27&#160;</span> If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their lord, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K112_28">28&#160;</span> Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves <span class='add'>of</span> gold, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="K112_29">29&#160;</span> And he set the one in Beth-el, and the other put he in Dan.
<span class="verse" id="K112_30">30&#160;</span> And this thing became a sin: for the people went <span class='add'>to worship</span> before the one, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Dan.
<span class="verse" id="K112_31">31&#160;</span> And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi.
<span class="verse" id="K112_32">32&#160;</span> And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like unto the feast that <span class='add'>is</span> in Judah, and he <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offered upon the altar. So did he in Beth-el, <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sacrificing unto the calves that he had made: and he placed in Beth-el the priests of the high places which he had made.
<span class="verse" id="K112_33">33&#160;</span> So he <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offered upon the altar which he had made in Beth-el the fifteenth day of the eighth month, <span class='add'>even</span> in the month which he had devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of Israel: and he offered upon the altar, <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and burnt incense.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K113_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K113_1">1&#160;</span> And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Beth-el: and Jeroboam stood by the altar <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to burn incense.
<span class="verse" id="K113_2">2&#160;</span> And he cried against the altar in the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, O altar, altar, thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, a child shall be born unto the house of David, <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Josiah by name; and upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men’s bones shall be burnt upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="K113_3">3&#160;</span> And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the sign which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken; Behold, the altar shall be rent, and the ashes that <span class='add'>are</span> upon it shall be poured out.
<span class="verse" id="K113_4">4&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of God, which had cried against the altar in Beth-el, that he put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not pull it in again to him.
<span class="verse" id="K113_5">5&#160;</span> The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K113_6">6&#160;</span> And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now the face of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again. And the man of God besought <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the king’s hand was restored <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>him again, and became as <span class='add'>it was</span> before.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="K113_7">7&#160;</span> And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.
<span class="verse" id="K113_8">8&#160;</span> And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half thine house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this place:
<span class="verse" id="K113_9">9&#160;</span> For so was it charged me by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way that thou camest.
<span class="verse" id="K113_10">10&#160;</span> So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to Beth-el. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K113_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now there dwelt an old prophet in Beth-el; and his <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Beth-el: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told also to their father.
<span class="verse" id="K113_12">12&#160;</span> And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons had seen what way the man of God went, which came from Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K113_13">13&#160;</span> And he said unto his sons, Saddle me the ass. So they saddled him the ass: and he rode thereon,
<span class="verse" id="K113_14">14&#160;</span> And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under an oak: and he said unto him, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou the man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K113_15">15&#160;</span> Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread.
<span class="verse" id="K113_16">16&#160;</span> And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee: neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place:
<span class="verse" id="K113_17">17&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it was said to me by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou camest.
<span class="verse" id="K113_18">18&#160;</span> He said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> a prophet also as thou <span class='add'>art;</span> and an angel spake unto me by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. <span class='add'>But</span> he lied unto him.
<span class="verse" id="K113_19">19&#160;</span> So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K113_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto the prophet that brought him back:
<span class="verse" id="K113_21">21&#160;</span> And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and hast not kept the commandment which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God commanded thee,
<span class="verse" id="K113_22">22&#160;</span> But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of the which <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> did say to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no water; thy carcase shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K113_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled for him the ass, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, for the prophet whom he had brought back.
<span class="verse" id="K113_24">24&#160;</span> And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him: and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion also stood by the carcase.
<span class="verse" id="K113_25">25&#160;</span> And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way, and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told <span class='add'>it</span> in the city where the old prophet dwelt.
<span class="verse" id="K113_26">26&#160;</span> And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard <span class='add'>thereof</span>, he said, It <span class='add'>is</span> the man of God, who was disobedient unto the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake unto him.
<span class="verse" id="K113_27">27&#160;</span> And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they saddled <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K113_28">28&#160;</span> And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the carcase, nor <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>torn the ass.
<span class="verse" id="K113_29">29&#160;</span> And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the city, to mourn and to bury him.
<span class="verse" id="K113_30">30&#160;</span> And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over him, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Alas, my brother!
<span class="verse" id="K113_31">31&#160;</span> And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God <span class='add'>is</span> buried; lay my bones beside his bones:
<span class="verse" id="K113_32">32&#160;</span> For the saying which he cried by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against the altar in Beth-el, and against all the houses of the high places which <span class='add'>are</span> in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K113_33">33&#160;</span>¶ After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever would, he <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consecrated him, and he became <span class='add'>one</span> of the priests of the high places.
<span class="verse" id="K113_34">34&#160;</span> And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut <span class='add'>it</span> off, and to destroy <span class='add'>it</span> from off the face of the earth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K114_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_1">1&#160;</span> At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.
<span class="verse" id="K114_2">2&#160;</span> And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get thee to Shiloh: behold, there <span class='add'>is</span> Ahijah the prophet, which told me that <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>I should be</span> king over this people.
<span class="verse" id="K114_3">3&#160;</span> And take <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with thee ten loaves, and <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cracknels, and a <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cruse of honey, and go to him: he shall tell thee what shall become of the child.
<span class="verse" id="K114_4">4&#160;</span> And Jeroboam’s wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not see; for his eyes <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were set by reason of his age.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask a thing of thee for her son; for he <span class='add'>is</span> sick: thus and thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shall be, when she cometh in, that she shall feign herself <span class='add'>to be</span> another <span class='add'>woman</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K114_6">6&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself <span class='add'>to be</span> another? for I <span class='add'>am</span> sent to thee <span class='add'>with</span> <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heavy <span class='add'>tidings</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_7">7&#160;</span> Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my people Israel,
<span class="verse" id="K114_8">8&#160;</span> And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thee: and <span class='add'>yet</span> thou hast not been as my servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do <span class='add'>that</span> only <span class='add'>which was</span> right in mine eyes;
<span class="verse" id="K114_9">9&#160;</span> But hast done evil above all that were before thee: for thou hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me behind thy back:
<span class="verse" id="K114_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>him that pisseth against the wall, <span class='add'>and</span> him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, till it be all gone.
<span class="verse" id="K114_11">11&#160;</span> Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K114_12">12&#160;</span> Arise thou therefore, get thee to thine own house: <span class='add'>and</span> when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.
<span class="verse" id="K114_13">13&#160;</span> And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found <span class='add'>some</span> good thing toward the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam.
<span class="verse" id="K114_14">14&#160;</span> Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall raise him up a king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now.
<span class="verse" id="K114_15">15&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river, because they have made their groves, provoking the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to anger.
<span class="verse" id="K114_16">16&#160;</span> And he shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Jeroboam’s wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: <span class='add'>and</span> when she came to the threshold of the door, the child died;
<span class="verse" id="K114_18">18&#160;</span> And they buried him; and all Israel mourned for him, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah the prophet.
<span class="verse" id="K114_19">19&#160;</span> And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K114_20">20&#160;</span> And the days which Jeroboam reigned <span class='add'>were</span> two and twenty years: and he <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rehoboam <span class='add'>was</span> forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did choose out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Naamah an Ammonitess.
<span class="verse" id="K114_22">22&#160;</span> And Judah did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they had committed, above all that their fathers had done.
<span class="verse" id="K114_23">23&#160;</span> For they also built them high places, and <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>images, and groves, on every high hill, and under every green tree.
<span class="verse" id="K114_24">24&#160;</span> And there were also sodomites in the land: <span class='add'>and</span> they did according to all the abominations of the nations which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cast out before the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, <span class='add'>that</span> Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem:
<span class="verse" id="K114_26">26&#160;</span> And he took away the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the treasures of the king’s house; he even took away all: and he took away all the shields of gold <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which Solomon had made.
<span class="verse" id="K114_27">27&#160;</span> And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and committed <span class='add'>them</span> unto the hands of the chief of the <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>guard, which kept the door of the king’s house.
<span class="verse" id="K114_28">28&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, when the king went into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard chamber. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K114_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
<span class="verse" id="K114_30">30&#160;</span> And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all <span class='add'>their</span> days.
<span class="verse" id="K114_31">31&#160;</span> And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Naamah an Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K115_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K115_1">1&#160;</span> Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat reigned Abijam over Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K115_2">2&#160;</span> Three years reigned he in Jerusalem. <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.
<span class="verse" id="K115_3">3&#160;</span> And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him: and his heart was not perfect with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, as the heart of David his father.
<span class="verse" id="K115_4">4&#160;</span> Nevertheless for David’s sake did the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God give him a <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem:
<span class="verse" id="K115_5">5&#160;</span> Because David did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and turned not aside from any <span class='add'>thing</span> that he commanded him all the days of his life, <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
<span class="verse" id="K115_6">6&#160;</span> And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.
<span class="verse" id="K115_7">7&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and all that he did, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.
<span class="verse" id="K115_8">8&#160;</span> And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David: and <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Asa his son reigned in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K115_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K115_10">10&#160;</span> And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Maachah, the daughter of Abishalom.
<span class="verse" id="K115_11">11&#160;</span> And Asa did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as <span class='add'>did</span> David his father.
<span class="verse" id="K115_12">12&#160;</span> And he took away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
<span class="verse" id="K115_13">13&#160;</span> And also <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Maachah his mother, even her he removed from <span class='add'>being</span> queen, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroyed her idol, and burnt <span class='add'>it</span> by the brook Kidron.
<span class="verse" id="K115_14">14&#160;</span> But the high places were not removed: nevertheless Asa’s heart was perfect with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all his days.
<span class="verse" id="K115_15">15&#160;</span> And he brought in the <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>things which his father had dedicated, and the things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, silver, and gold, and vessels.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K115_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
<span class="verse" id="K115_17">17&#160;</span> And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suffer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="K115_18">18&#160;</span> Then Asa took all the silver and the gold <span class='add'>that were</span> left in the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the treasures of the king’s house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa sent them to <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ben-hadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K115_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a league between me and thee, <span class='add'>and</span> between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thee a present of silver and gold; come and break <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>depart from me.
<span class="verse" id="K115_20">20&#160;</span> So Ben-hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-maachah, and all Cinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.
<span class="verse" id="K115_21">21&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Baasha heard <span class='add'>thereof</span>, that he left off building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="K115_22">22&#160;</span> Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout all Judah; none <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>exempted: and they took away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
<span class="verse" id="K115_23">23&#160;</span> The rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheless in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.
<span class="verse" id="K115_24">24&#160;</span> And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K115_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Nadab the son of Jeroboam <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years.
<span class="verse" id="K115_26">26&#160;</span> And he did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K115_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><span class='add'>belonged</span> to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel laid siege to Gibbethon.
<span class="verse" id="K115_28">28&#160;</span> Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Baasha slay him, and reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="K115_29">29&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he reigned, <span class='add'>that</span> he smote all the house of Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had destroyed him, according unto <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the saying of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite:
<span class="verse" id="K115_30">30&#160;</span> Because of the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and which he made Israel sin, by his provocation wherewith he provoked the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel to anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K115_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="K115_32">32&#160;</span> And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
<span class="verse" id="K115_33">33&#160;</span> In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years.
<span class="verse" id="K115_34">34&#160;</span> And he did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K116_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_1">1&#160;</span> Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K116_2">2&#160;</span> Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins;
<span class="verse" id="K116_3">3&#160;</span> Behold, I will take away the posterity of Baasha, and the posterity of his house; and will make thy house like <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
<span class="verse" id="K116_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat.
<span class="verse" id="K116_5">5&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his might, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="K116_6">6&#160;</span> So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="K116_7">7&#160;</span> And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against Baasha, and against his house, even for all the evil that he did in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in provoking him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam; and because he killed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_8">8&#160;</span>¶ In the <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years.
<span class="verse" id="K116_9">9&#160;</span> And his servant Zimri, captain of half <span class='add'>his</span> chariots, conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>steward of <span class='add'>his</span> house in Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="K116_10">10&#160;</span> And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, <span class='add'>that</span> he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not one that pisseth against a wall, <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends.
<span class="verse" id="K116_12">12&#160;</span> Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake against Baasha <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Jehu the prophet,
<span class="verse" id="K116_13">13&#160;</span> For all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, by which they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel to anger with their vanities.
<span class="verse" id="K116_14">14&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_15">15&#160;</span>¶ In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people <span class='add'>were</span> encamped against Gibbethon, which <span class='add'>belonged</span> to the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="K116_16">16&#160;</span> And the people <span class='add'>that were</span> encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp.
<span class="verse" id="K116_17">17&#160;</span> And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="K116_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king’s house, and burnt the king’s house over him with fire, and died,
<span class="verse" id="K116_19">19&#160;</span> For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>to sin.
<span class="verse" id="K116_20">20&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half followed Omri.
<span class="verse" id="K116_22">22&#160;</span> But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_23">23&#160;</span>¶ In the thirty and <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="K116_24">24&#160;</span> And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Samaria.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_25">25&#160;</span>¶ But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and did worse than all that <span class='add'>were</span> before him.
<span class="verse" id="K116_26">26&#160;</span> For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel to anger with their vanities.
<span class="verse" id="K116_27">27&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he shewed, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="K116_28">28&#160;</span> So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years.
<span class="verse" id="K116_30">30&#160;</span> And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> above all that <span class='add'>were</span> before him.
<span class="verse" id="K116_31">31&#160;</span> And it came to pass, <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him.
<span class="verse" id="K116_32">32&#160;</span> And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.
<span class="verse" id="K116_33">33&#160;</span> And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K116_34">34&#160;</span>¶ In his days did Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest <span class='add'>son</span> Segub, <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K117_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K117_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Elijah the Tishbite, <span class='add'>who was</span> of the inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab, <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.
<span class="verse" id="K117_2">2&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto him, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K117_3">3&#160;</span> Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that <span class='add'>is</span> before Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="K117_4">4&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
<span class="verse" id="K117_5">5&#160;</span> So he went and did according unto the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that <span class='add'>is</span> before Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="K117_6">6&#160;</span> And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook.
<span class="verse" id="K117_7">7&#160;</span> And it came to pass <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>after a while, that the brook dried up, because there had been no rain in the land.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K117_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto him, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K117_9">9&#160;</span> Arise, get thee to <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zarephath, which <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee.
<span class="verse" id="K117_10">10&#160;</span> So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the widow woman <span class='add'>was</span> there gathering of sticks: and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.
<span class="verse" id="K117_11">11&#160;</span> And as she was going to fetch <span class='add'>it</span>, he called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="K117_12">12&#160;</span> And she said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and, behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.
<span class="verse" id="K117_13">13&#160;</span> And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go <span class='add'>and</span> do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring <span class='add'>it</span> unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son.
<span class="verse" id="K117_14">14&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sendeth rain upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="K117_15">15&#160;</span> And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>many</span> days.
<span class="verse" id="K117_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Elijah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K117_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after these things, <span class='add'>that</span> the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.
<span class="verse" id="K117_18">18&#160;</span> And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?
<span class="verse" id="K117_19">19&#160;</span> And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.
<span class="verse" id="K117_20">20&#160;</span> And he cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son?
<span class="verse" id="K117_21">21&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, I pray thee, let this child’s soul come <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>into him again.
<span class="verse" id="K117_22">22&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.
<span class="verse" id="K117_23">23&#160;</span> And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K117_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou <span class='add'>art</span> a man of God, <span class='add'>and</span> that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in thy mouth <span class='add'>is</span> truth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K118_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K118_1">1&#160;</span>And it came to pass <span class='add'>after</span> many days, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab; and I will send rain upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="K118_2">2&#160;</span> And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And <span class='add'>there was</span> a sore famine in Samaria.
<span class="verse" id="K118_3">3&#160;</span> And Ahab called <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Obadiah, which <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the governor of <span class='add'>his</span> house. (Now Obadiah feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> greatly:
<span class="verse" id="K118_4">4&#160;</span>For it was <span class='add'>so</span>, when <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Jezebel cut off the prophets of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that Obadiah took an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.)
<span class="verse" id="K118_5">5&#160;</span> And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all fountains of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find grass to save the horses and mules alive, <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that we lose not all the beasts.
<span class="verse" id="K118_6">6&#160;</span> So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K118_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou that my lord Elijah?
<span class="verse" id="K118_8">8&#160;</span> And he answered him, I <span class='add'>am:</span> go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah <span class='add'>is here</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K118_9">9&#160;</span> And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me?
<span class="verse" id="K118_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to seek thee: and when they said, <span class='add'>He is</span> not <span class='add'>there;</span> he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not.
<span class="verse" id="K118_11">11&#160;</span> And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah <span class='add'>is here</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K118_12">12&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>as soon as</span> I am gone from thee, that the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall carry thee whither I know not; and <span class='add'>so</span> when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me: but I thy servant fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from my youth.
<span class="verse" id="K118_13">13&#160;</span> Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the prophets of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, how I hid an hundred men of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
<span class="verse" id="K118_14">14&#160;</span> And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah <span class='add'>is here:</span> and he shall slay me.
<span class="verse" id="K118_15">15&#160;</span> And Elijah said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day.
<span class="verse" id="K118_16">16&#160;</span> So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to meet Elijah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K118_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou he that troubleth Israel?
<span class="verse" id="K118_18">18&#160;</span> And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father’s house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thou hast followed Baalim.
<span class="verse" id="K118_19">19&#160;</span> Now therefore send, <span class='add'>and</span> gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel’s table.
<span class="verse" id="K118_20">20&#160;</span> So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K118_21">21&#160;</span> And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>opinions? if the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> God, follow him: but if Baal, <span class='add'>then</span> follow him. And the people answered him not a word.
<span class="verse" id="K118_22">22&#160;</span> Then said Elijah unto the people, I, <span class='add'>even</span> I only, remain a prophet of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; but Baal’s prophets <span class='add'>are</span> four hundred and fifty men.
<span class="verse" id="K118_23">23&#160;</span> Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay <span class='add'>it</span> on wood, and put no fire <span class='add'>under:</span> and I will dress the other bullock, and lay <span class='add'>it</span> on wood, and put no fire <span class='add'>under:</span>
<span class="verse" id="K118_24">24&#160;</span> And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>It is well spoken.
<span class="verse" id="K118_25">25&#160;</span> And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress <span class='add'>it</span> first; for ye <span class='add'>are</span> many; and call on the name of your gods, but put no fire <span class='add'>under</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K118_26">26&#160;</span> And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed <span class='add'>it</span>, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hear us. But <span class='add'>there was</span> no voice, nor any that <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>answered. And they <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>leaped upon the altar which was made.
<span class="verse" id="K118_27">27&#160;</span> And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>aloud: for he <span class='add'>is</span> a god; either <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he is talking, or he <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is pursuing, or he is in a journey, <span class='add'>or</span> peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked.
<span class="verse" id="K118_28">28&#160;</span> And they cried <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the blood gushed out upon them.
<span class="verse" id="K118_29">29&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied until the <span class='add'>time</span> of the <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offering of the <span class='add'>evening</span> sacrifice, that <span class='add'>there was</span> neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that regarded.
<span class="verse" id="K118_30">30&#160;</span> And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>that was</span> broken down.
<span class="verse" id="K118_31">31&#160;</span> And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came, saying, <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Israel shall be thy name:
<span class="verse" id="K118_32">32&#160;</span> And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.
<span class="verse" id="K118_33">33&#160;</span> And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid <span class='add'>him</span> on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour <span class='add'>it</span> on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood.
<span class="verse" id="K118_34">34&#160;</span> And he said, Do <span class='add'>it</span> the second time. And they did <span class='add'>it</span> the second time. And he said, Do <span class='add'>it</span> the third time. And they did <span class='add'>it</span> the third time.
<span class="verse" id="K118_35">35&#160;</span> And the water <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water.
<span class="verse" id="K118_36">36&#160;</span>And it came to pass at <span class='add'>the time of</span> the offering of the <span class='add'>evening</span> sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou <span class='add'>art</span> God in Israel, and <span class='add'>that</span> I <span class='add'>am</span> thy servant, and <span class='add'>that</span> I have done all these things at thy word.
<span class="verse" id="K118_37">37&#160;</span> Hear me, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, hear me, that this people may know that thou <span class='add'>art</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, and <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast turned their heart back again.
<span class="verse" id="K118_38">38&#160;</span> Then the fire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that <span class='add'>was</span> in the trench.
<span class="verse" id="K118_39">39&#160;</span> And when all the people saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they fell on their faces: and they said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he <span class='add'>is</span> the God; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he <span class='add'>is</span> the God.
<span class="verse" id="K118_40">40&#160;</span> And Elijah said unto them, <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K118_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for <span class='add'>there is</span> <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a sound of abundance of rain.
<span class="verse" id="K118_42">42&#160;</span> So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees,
<span class="verse" id="K118_43">43&#160;</span> And said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, <span class='add'>There is</span> nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.
<span class="verse" id="K118_44">44&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man’s hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Prepare <span class='add'>thy chariot</span>, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not.
<span class="verse" id="K118_45">45&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel.
<span class="verse" id="K118_46">46&#160;</span> And the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to the entrance of Jezreel.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K119_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K119_1">1&#160;</span> And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="K119_2">2&#160;</span> Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do <span class='add'>to me</span>, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to morrow about this time.
<span class="verse" id="K119_3">3&#160;</span> And when he saw <span class='add'>that</span>, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Judah, and left his servant there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K119_4">4&#160;</span>¶ But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, take away my life; for I <span class='add'>am</span> not better than my fathers.
<span class="verse" id="K119_5">5&#160;</span> And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise <span class='add'>and</span> eat.
<span class="verse" id="K119_6">6&#160;</span> And he looked, and, behold, <span class='add'>there was</span> a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again.
<span class="verse" id="K119_7">7&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise <span class='add'>and</span> eat; because the journey <span class='add'>is</span> too great for thee.
<span class="verse" id="K119_8">8&#160;</span> And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K119_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>came</span> to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah?
<span class="verse" id="K119_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, I have been very jealous for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I, <span class='add'>even</span> I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.
<span class="verse" id="K119_11">11&#160;</span> And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; <span class='add'>but</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; <span class='add'>but</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> not in the earthquake:
<span class="verse" id="K119_12">12&#160;</span> And after the earthquake a fire; <span class='add'>but</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.
<span class="verse" id="K119_13">13&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, when Elijah heard <span class='add'>it</span>, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, <span class='add'>there came</span> a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah?
<span class="verse" id="K119_14">14&#160;</span> And he said, I have been very jealous for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, <span class='add'>even</span> I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away.
<span class="verse" id="K119_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael <span class='add'>to be</span> king over Syria:
<span class="verse" id="K119_16">16&#160;</span> And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint <span class='add'>to be</span> king over Israel: and <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint <span class='add'>to be</span> prophet in thy room.
<span class="verse" id="K119_17">17&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay.
<span class="verse" id="K119_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Yet <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I have left <span class='add'>me</span> seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K119_19">19&#160;</span>¶ So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who <span class='add'>was</span> plowing <span class='add'>with</span> twelve yoke <span class='add'>of oxen</span> before him, and he with the twelfth: and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him.
<span class="verse" id="K119_20">20&#160;</span> And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and <span class='add'>then</span> I will follow thee. And he said unto him, <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Go back again: for what have I done to thee?
<span class="verse" id="K119_21">21&#160;</span> And he returned back from him, and took a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K120_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_1">1&#160;</span> And Ben-hadad the king of Syria gathered all his host together: and <span class='add'>there were</span> thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and chariots: and he went up and besieged Samaria, and warred against it.
<span class="verse" id="K120_2">2&#160;</span> And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and said unto him, Thus saith Ben-hadad,
<span class="verse" id="K120_3">3&#160;</span> Thy silver and thy gold <span class='add'>is</span> mine; thy wives also and thy children, <span class='add'>even</span> the goodliest, <span class='add'>are</span> mine.
<span class="verse" id="K120_4">4&#160;</span> And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> thine, and all that I have.
<span class="verse" id="K120_5">5&#160;</span> And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Ben-hadad, saying, Although I have sent unto thee, saying, Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children;
<span class="verse" id="K120_6">6&#160;</span> Yet I will send my servants unto thee to morrow about this time, and they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> whatsoever is <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put <span class='add'>it</span> in their hand, and take <span class='add'>it</span> away.
<span class="verse" id="K120_7">7&#160;</span> Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this <span class='add'>man</span> seeketh mischief: for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for my gold; and <a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I denied him not.
<span class="verse" id="K120_8">8&#160;</span> And all the elders and all the people said unto him, Hearken not <span class='add'>unto him</span>, nor consent.
<span class="verse" id="K120_9">9&#160;</span> Wherefore he said unto the messengers of Ben-hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I will do: but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and brought him word again.
<span class="verse" id="K120_10">10&#160;</span> And Ben-hadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>follow me.
<span class="verse" id="K120_11">11&#160;</span> And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell <span class='add'>him</span>, Let not him that girdeth on <span class='add'>his harness</span> boast himself as he that putteth it off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_12">12&#160;</span>And it came to pass, when <span class='add'>Ben-hadad</span> heard this <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>message, as he <span class='add'>was</span> drinking, he and the kings in the <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pavilions, that he said unto his servants, <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Set <span class='add'>yourselves in array</span>. And they set <span class='add'>themselves in array</span> against the city.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, there <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Hast thou seen all this great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K120_14">14&#160;</span> And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>Even</span> by the <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>order the battle? And he answered, Thou.
<span class="verse" id="K120_15">15&#160;</span> Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered all the people, <span class='add'>even</span> all the children of Israel, <span class='add'>being</span> seven thousand.
<span class="verse" id="K120_16">16&#160;</span> And they went out at noon. But Ben-hadad <span class='add'>was</span> drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings that helped him.
<span class="verse" id="K120_17">17&#160;</span> And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first; and Ben-hadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men come out of Samaria.
<span class="verse" id="K120_18">18&#160;</span> And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive.
<span class="verse" id="K120_19">19&#160;</span> So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of the city, and the army which followed them.
<span class="verse" id="K120_20">20&#160;</span> And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and Israel pursued them: and Ben-hadad the king of Syria escaped on an horse with the horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="K120_21">21&#160;</span> And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him, Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and see what thou doest: for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.
<span class="verse" id="K120_23">23&#160;</span> And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods <span class='add'>are</span> gods of the hills; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.
<span class="verse" id="K120_24">24&#160;</span> And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put captains in their rooms:
<span class="verse" id="K120_25">25&#160;</span> And number thee an army, like the army <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot: and we will fight against them in the plain, <span class='add'>and</span> surely we shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and did so.
<span class="verse" id="K120_26">26&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Ben-hadad numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to fight against Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K120_27">27&#160;</span> And the children of Israel were numbered, and <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>were all present, and went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them like two little flocks of kids; but the Syrians filled the country.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And there came a man of God, and spake unto the king of Israel, and said, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Because the Syrians have said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> God of the hills, but he <span class='add'>is</span> not God of the valleys, therefore will I deliver all this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K120_29">29&#160;</span> And they pitched one over against the other seven days. And <span class='add'>so</span> it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined: and the children of Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in one day.
<span class="verse" id="K120_30">30&#160;</span> But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and <span class='add'>there</span> a wall fell upon twenty and seven thousand of the men <span class='add'>that were</span> left. And Ben-hadad fled, and came into the city, <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>into an inner chamber.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel <span class='add'>are</span> merciful kings: let us, I pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the king of Israel: peradventure he will save thy life.
<span class="verse" id="K120_32">32&#160;</span> So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and <span class='add'>put</span> ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Ben-hadad saith, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, <span class='add'>Is</span> he yet alive? he <span class='add'>is</span> my brother.
<span class="verse" id="K120_33">33&#160;</span> Now the men did diligently observe whether <span class='add'>any thing would come</span> from him, and did hastily catch <span class='add'>it:</span> and they said, Thy brother Ben-hadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Ben-hadad came forth to him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.
<span class="verse" id="K120_34">34&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>Ben-hadad</span> said unto him, The cities, which my father took from thy father, I will restore; and thou shalt make streets for thee in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria. Then <span class='add'>said Ahab</span>, I will send thee away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and sent him away.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K120_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his neighbour in the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man refused to smite him.
<span class="verse" id="K120_36">36&#160;</span> Then said he unto him, Because thou hast not obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, behold, as soon as thou art departed from me, a lion shall slay thee. And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and slew him.
<span class="verse" id="K120_37">37&#160;</span> Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him, <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>so that in smiting he wounded <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K120_38">38&#160;</span> So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and disguised himself with ashes upon his face.
<span class="verse" id="K120_39">39&#160;</span> And as the king passed by, he cried unto the king: and he said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle; and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Keep this man: if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else thou shalt <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pay a talent of silver.
<span class="verse" id="K120_40">40&#160;</span> And as thy servant was busy here and there, <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he was gone. And the king of Israel said unto him, So <span class='add'>shall</span> thy judgment <span class='add'>be;</span> thyself hast decided <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K120_41">41&#160;</span> And he hasted, and took the ashes away from his face; and the king of Israel discerned him that he <span class='add'>was</span> of the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="K120_42">42&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Because thou hast let go out of <span class='add'>thy</span> hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people.
<span class="verse" id="K120_43">43&#160;</span> And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased, and came to Samaria.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K121_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K121_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after these things, <span class='add'>that</span> Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which <span class='add'>was</span> in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
<span class="verse" id="K121_2">2&#160;</span> And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it <span class='add'>is</span> near unto my house: and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; <span class='add'>or</span>, if it <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.
<span class="verse" id="K121_3">3&#160;</span> And Naboth said to Ahab, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="K121_4">4&#160;</span> And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him: for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K121_5">5&#160;</span>¶ But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread?
<span class="verse" id="K121_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thee, I will give thee <span class='add'>another</span> vineyard for it: and he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="K121_7">7&#160;</span> And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, <span class='add'>and</span> eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.
<span class="verse" id="K121_8">8&#160;</span> So she wrote letters in Ahab’s name, and sealed <span class='add'>them</span> with his seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to the nobles that <span class='add'>were</span> in his city, dwelling with Naboth.
<span class="verse" id="K121_9">9&#160;</span> And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>on high among the people:
<span class="verse" id="K121_10">10&#160;</span> And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And <span class='add'>then</span> carry him out, and stone him, that he may die.
<span class="verse" id="K121_11">11&#160;</span> And the men of his city, <span class='add'>even</span> the elders and the nobles who were the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, <span class='add'>and</span> as it <span class='add'>was</span> written in the letters which she had sent unto them.
<span class="verse" id="K121_12">12&#160;</span> They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.
<span class="verse" id="K121_13">13&#160;</span> And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of Belial witnessed against him, <span class='add'>even</span> against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died.
<span class="verse" id="K121_14">14&#160;</span> Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K121_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead.
<span class="verse" id="K121_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession of it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K121_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K121_18">18&#160;</span> Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Samaria: behold, <span class='add'>he is</span> in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="K121_19">19&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.
<span class="verse" id="K121_20">20&#160;</span> And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found <span class='add'>thee:</span> because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="K121_21">21&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>him that pisseth against the wall, and <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>him that is shut up and left in Israel,
<span class="verse" id="K121_22">22&#160;</span> And will make thine house like the house of <a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked <span class='add'>me</span> to anger, and made Israel to sin.
<span class="verse" id="K121_23">23&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of Jezebel also spake the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the <a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wall of Jezreel.
<span class="verse" id="K121_24">24&#160;</span> Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat; and him that dieth in the field shall the fowls of the air eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K121_25">25&#160;</span>¶ But there was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, whom Jezebel his wife <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stirred up.
<span class="verse" id="K121_26">26&#160;</span> And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all <span class='add'>things</span> as did the Amorites, whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cast out before the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K121_27">27&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.
<span class="verse" id="K121_28">28&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
<span class="verse" id="K121_29">29&#160;</span> Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days: <span class='add'>but</span> in his son’s days will I bring the evil upon his house.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='K122_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_1">1&#160;</span> And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K122_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the third year, that <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K122_3">3&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth in Gilead <span class='add'>is</span> ours, and we <span class='add'>be</span> <a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>still, <span class='add'>and</span> take it not out of the hand of the king of Syria?
<span class="verse" id="K122_4">4&#160;</span> And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou go with me to battle to Ramoth-gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> as thou <span class='add'>art</span>, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.
<span class="verse" id="K122_5">5&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to day.
<span class="verse" id="K122_6">6&#160;</span> Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall I go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the Lord shall deliver <span class='add'>it</span> into the hand of the king.
<span class="verse" id="K122_7">7&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat said, <span class='add'>Is there</span> not here a prophet of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> besides, that we might enquire of him?
<span class="verse" id="K122_8">8&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, <span class='add'>There is</span> yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.
<span class="verse" id="K122_9">9&#160;</span> Then the king of Israel called an <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>officer, and said, Hasten <span class='add'>hither</span> Micaiah the son of Imlah.
<span class="verse" id="K122_10">10&#160;</span> And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>void place in the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.
<span class="verse" id="K122_11">11&#160;</span> And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him horns of iron: and he said, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, With these shalt thou push the Syrians, until thou have consumed them.
<span class="verse" id="K122_12">12&#160;</span> And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall deliver <span class='add'>it</span> into the king’s hand.
<span class="verse" id="K122_13">13&#160;</span> And the messenger that was gone to call Micaiah spake unto him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets <span class='add'>declare</span> good unto the king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak <span class='add'>that which is</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="K122_14">14&#160;</span> And Micaiah said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith unto me, that will I speak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_15">15&#160;</span>¶ So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go, and prosper: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall deliver <span class='add'>it</span> into the hand of the king.
<span class="verse" id="K122_16">16&#160;</span> And the king said unto him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou tell me nothing but <span class='add'>that which is</span> true in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="K122_17">17&#160;</span> And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the hills, as sheep that have not a shepherd: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, These have no master: let them return every man to his house in peace.
<span class="verse" id="K122_18">18&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would prophesy no good concerning me, but evil?
<span class="verse" id="K122_19">19&#160;</span> And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: I saw the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.
<span class="verse" id="K122_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Who shall <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one said on this manner, and another said on that manner.
<span class="verse" id="K122_21">21&#160;</span> And there came forth a spirit, and stood before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, I will persuade him.
<span class="verse" id="K122_22">22&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persuade <span class='add'>him</span>, and prevail also: go forth, and do so.
<span class="verse" id="K122_23">23&#160;</span> Now therefore, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken evil concerning thee.
<span class="verse" id="K122_24">24&#160;</span> But Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Which way went the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from me to speak unto thee?
<span class="verse" id="K122_25">25&#160;</span> And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see in that day, when thou shalt go <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>into <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an inner chamber to hide thyself.
<span class="verse" id="K122_26">26&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son;
<span class="verse" id="K122_27">27&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the king, Put this <span class='add'>fellow</span> in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I come in peace.
<span class="verse" id="K122_28">28&#160;</span> And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_29">29&#160;</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
<span class="verse" id="K122_30">30&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I will disguise myself, and enter into the battle; but put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.
<span class="verse" id="K122_31">31&#160;</span> But the king of Syria commanded his thirty and two captains that had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the king of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K122_32">32&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it <span class='add'>is</span> the king of Israel. And they turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out.
<span class="verse" id="K122_33">33&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it <span class='add'>was</span> not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
<span class="verse" id="K122_34">34&#160;</span>And a <span class='add'>certain</span> man drew a bow <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>joints of the harness: wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and carry me out of the host; for I am <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wounded.
<span class="verse" id="K122_35">35&#160;</span> And the battle <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>increased that day: and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blood ran out of the wound into the <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>midst of the chariot.
<span class="verse" id="K122_36">36&#160;</span> And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to his own country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_37">37&#160;</span>¶ So the king died, and <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>was brought to Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.
<span class="verse" id="K122_38">38&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> washed the chariot in the pool of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood; and they washed his armour; according <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>unto the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he spake.
<span class="verse" id="K122_39">39&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he made, and all the cities that he built, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="K122_40">40&#160;</span> So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K122_42">42&#160;</span> Jehoshaphat <span class='add'>was</span> thirty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
<span class="verse" id="K122_43">43&#160;</span> And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: nevertheless the high places were not taken away; <span class='add'>for</span> the people offered and burnt incense yet in the high places.
<span class="verse" id="K122_44">44&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K122_45">45&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he shewed, and how he warred, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
<span class="verse" id="K122_46">46&#160;</span> And the remnant of the sodomites, which remained in the days of his father Asa, he took out of the land.
<span class="verse" id="K122_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There was</span> then no king in Edom: a deputy <span class='add'>was</span> king.
<span class="verse" id="K122_48">48&#160;</span> Jehoshaphat <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but they went not; for the ships were broken at Ezion-geber.
<span class="verse" id="K122_49">49&#160;</span> Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_50">50&#160;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K122_51">51&#160;</span>¶ Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years over Israel.
<span class="verse" id="K122_52">52&#160;</span> And he did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin:
<span class="verse" id="K122_53">53&#160;</span> For he served Baal, and worshipped him, and provoked to anger the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, according to all that his father had done. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. entered into days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Let them seek.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a damsel, a virgin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be a cherisher unto him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. reign.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from his days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his words were with Joab.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. helped after Adonijah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the well Rogel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_4'>3 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fill up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. What to thee?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sinners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Let king Adonijah live.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before the king.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which belongeth to me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K11_40"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, flutes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_9'>29. 9</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, do wisely.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be cut off from thee from the throne.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_27'>3. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S220_10'>20. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. put.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S219_31'>19. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S216_5'>16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strong.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S219_23'>19. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_29'>2. 29</a>. &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_36'>13. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_4'>5. 4</a>. 1 Chr. 29. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_26'>26</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R229_23'>29. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. turn not away my face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. 7. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>12</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of death.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.27</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. 2. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_31'>31</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_35'>35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_27'>3. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S220_10'>20. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K12_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.46</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K17_8'>7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 up on]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bounty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_10'>1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. many days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to hear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 word]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_11'>7. 11</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_33'>6. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hath not been.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K115_5'>15. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were hot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K13_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the midst of him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the chief officer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, secretaries.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, remembrancer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K15_14'>5. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, levy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ben-hur.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ben-dekar.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ben-hesed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ben-abinadab.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ben-geber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to Mahanaim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_13'>47. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bread.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. confidently.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_25'>9. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mules, or, swift beasts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K14_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. 47. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_14'>14</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_15'>15</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R22_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. say.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_13'>7. 13</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R122_10'>22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. say.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. send.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_12'>3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb tribute of men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_6'>4. 6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K15_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Giblites, as Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_9'>27. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R23_1'>3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 fourscore]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. built.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, windows broad within, and narrow without: or, skewed and closed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upon, or, joining to.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. floors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ribs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. narrowings, or, rebatements.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the vault-beams and the cielings with cedar.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_13'>7. 13</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R122_10'>22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K16_16'>16.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gourds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. openings of flowers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shut up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, oily.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. trees of oil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_20'>25. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the cherubims stretched forth their wings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. openings of flowers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fivesquare.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, leaves of the doors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. openings of flowers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, foursquare.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K16_38"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with all the appurtenances thereof, and with all the ordinances thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_10'>9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ribs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sight against sight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spaces and pillars were square in prospect.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, according to them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, according to them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from floor to floor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_1'>3. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the son of a widow woman.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fashional.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R23_17'>3. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, He shall establish.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, In it is strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb from his brim to his brim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R24_3'>4. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the base.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. nakedness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon the face of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_45"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made bright, or, scoured.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_46"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the thickness of the ground.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_47"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the exceeding multitude.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_47"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. searched.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_50"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ash pans.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_51"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. [holy] things of David.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K17_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.51</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R25_1'>5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R25_2'>5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. princes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heads.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R25_9'>5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_5'>10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, where.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_34'>40. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_8'>7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_13'>6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Mac. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_8'>2. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.25</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>7, 12</a>. ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K12_4'>2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. There shall not be cut off unto thee a man from my sight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. only if.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in this place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in this place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and he require an oath of him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, towards.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_37"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, jurisdiction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_43"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thy name is called upon this house.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the way of the city.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_45"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, right.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.46</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_36'>6. 36</a>. Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_22'>7. 22</a>. 1 John 1. <a href='1JN.xhtml#J11_8'>8</a>, <a href='1JN.xhtml#J11_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_47"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bring back to their heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_49"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, right.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_6'>19. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_56"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.56</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fallen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_59"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the thing of a day in his day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_61"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.61</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 your]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_62"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.62</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R27_4'>7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_64"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.64</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R27_7'>7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K18_66"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.66</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thanked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R27_11'>7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_5'>3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_29'>8. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>7 12</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R122_10'>22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_14'>7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_24'>29. 24</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_8'>22. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R28_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits king]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were not right in his eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, displeasing, or, dirty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the desire of Solomon which he desired.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_39'>25. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R28_11'>8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K19_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_1'>9. 1</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_42'>12. 42</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_31'>11. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. standing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, butlers</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sayings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thou hast added wisdom and goodness to the fame.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, rails.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a prop.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_10'>9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to the hand of king Solomon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, captains.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K17_2'>7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. on the hinder part thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. kands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. so.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, there was no silver in them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, elephants' teeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sought the face of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.26</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_14'>1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gave.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_16'>1 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_28'>9. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. And the going forth of the horses which was Solomon's.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K110_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by their hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_17'>17. 17</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_19'>47. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, besides.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_16'>34. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_13'>2 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ful filled not after.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_5'>3. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_2'>9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K16_12'>6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is with thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S28_14'>8. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Send me away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S28_3'>8 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='2SA.xhtml#S210_18'>10. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R213_6'>13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. closed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. did work.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. burden.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lamp, or, candle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_41"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, words, or, things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.42</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_80'>9. 80</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K111_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_7'>1. 7</a>, called Roboam.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R210_1'>10 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_40'>11. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_7'>4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hardly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_11'>11. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strengthened himself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fell away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_13'>11. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.22</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R211_2'>11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_8'>32. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, went up to the altar, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to sacrifice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, went up to the altar, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K112_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to burn incense.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to offer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_17'>23. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">the face of the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits him]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 son]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a word was.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. returned and made.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K113_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. filled his hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_31'>11. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in thine hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cakes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bottle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stood for his hoariness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K115_29'>15. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K121_21'>21. 21</a>. 2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_8'>9. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lay down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R212_13'>12. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, standing images, or, statues.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_17'>10. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K114_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. runners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R211_22'>11. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, candle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S211_4'>11. 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_9'>12. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R213_3'>13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R214_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, grandmother's.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R215_16'>15. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. holy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_2'>16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. go up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. free.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_8'>1. 8</a>. called Josaphat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. reigned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_27"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15.27</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 belongeth]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K115_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_10'>14. 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K115_29'>15. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_11'>14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_1'>16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 twentieth]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which was over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, both his kinsmen and his friends.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits to]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 one]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Shomeron.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was it a light thing, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K116_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS6_26'>6 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Elijahu. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_25'>4. 25</a>, he is called Elias</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_3'>48 3</a> James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_17'>5 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the end of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_26'>4. 26</a>, called Surepta.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. giveth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a full year.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. measured.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K117_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. into his inward parts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Obadiahu.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. over his house.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Izebel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that we cut not off ourselves from the beasts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thoughts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The word is good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, answer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, heard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, leaped up and down at the altar.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with a great voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he meditateth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hath a pursuit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_28"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 18.28</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 loud]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. poured out blood upon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ascending.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. attention.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_28'>32. 28</a> 2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K217_34'>17. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. went.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_40"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Apprehend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_41"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a sound of a noise of rain.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Tie, or, Bind.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K118_46"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. till thou come to Jezreel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for his life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bolster.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_3'>11. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_27'>4. 27</a>. called Eliseus.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings 9 <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_1'>1</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_3'>3</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_8'>48. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_4'>11. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I will leave.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K119_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Go return.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I kept not back from him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are at my feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, tents.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Place the engines: And they placed engines.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. approached.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bind. or, tie.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that was fallen,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to the war with Israel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, were victualled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from chamber to chamber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. into a chamber within a chamber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. smiting and wounding.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weigh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he was not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K120_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.42</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='1KI.xhtml#K122_38'>22. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be good in thine eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the top of the people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_10'>14. 10</a>. 2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_8'>9. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.21</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S125_22'>25. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_10'>14. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K115_29'>15. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_3'>16. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_36'>9. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ditch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K121_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, incited.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.2</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R218_1'>18 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. silent from taking it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K23_7'>3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, eunuch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. floor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, deceive.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.24</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R218_23'>18. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from chamber to chamber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a chamber in a chamber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when he was to disguise himself, and enter into the battle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his simplicity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. joints and the breast-plate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made sick.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ascended.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bosom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. came.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.38</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K121_19'>21. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.41</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_31'>20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K122_48"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, had ten ships.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
