<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 1 Maccabees 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Maccabees</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='M10_0'>

<div class='mt'>The First Book of the Maccabees  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M11_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="M11_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>And it happened, after that Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian, who came out of the land of <a href='#FN2'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN3'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Chettiim, had smitten Darius king of the Persians and <a href='#FN4'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Medes, that he reigned in his stead, the first over Greece, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_2">2&#160;</span>And made many wars, and won many <a href='#FN5'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>strong holds, and slew the kings of the earth, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_3">3&#160;</span>And went through to the ends of the earth, and took spoils of many nations, insomuch that the earth was quiet before him; whereupon <a href='#FN6'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he was exalted and his heart was lifted up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_4">4&#160;</span>And he gathered a mighty strong host and ruled over countries, and nations, and <a href='#FN7'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kings, who became tributaries unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_5">5&#160;</span>And after these things he <a href='#FN8'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>fell sick, and perceived <a href='#FN9'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that he should die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_6">6&#160;</span>Wherefore he called his servants, such as were honourable, and <a href='#FN10'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>had been brought up with him from his youth, and parted his kingdom among them, while he was yet alive. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_7">7&#160;</span>So Alexander reigned twelve years, and then <a href='#FN11'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_8">8&#160;</span>And his servants bare rule every one in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_9">9&#160;</span>And after his death they all put <a href='#FN12'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ff</a>crowns upon themselves; so did their sons after them many years: and evils were multiplied in the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_10">10&#160;</span>And there came out of them <a href='#FN13'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>a wicked root <a href='#FN14'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, son of Antiochus the king, <a href='#FN15'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>who had been <a href='#FN16'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>an hostage at Rome, and he reigned in <a href='#FN17'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred and thirty and seventh year <a href='#FN18'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of the kingdom of the Greeks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>In those days went there out of Israel <a href='#FN20'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ii</a>wicked men, who persuaded many, saying, Let us go and make a covenant with the heathen that are round about us: for since we departed from them <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>we have had much sorrow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_12">12&#160;</span>So this device pleased them well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_13">13&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN22'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ii</a>certain of the people were so forward herein, that they went to the king, who gave them licence to do after the ordinances of the heathen: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_14">14&#160;</span>Whereupon <a href='#FN23'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>they <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>built a place of exercise at Jerusalem according to the customs of the heathen: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_15">15&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN25'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>made themselves uncircumcised, and forsook the holy covenant, and <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>joined themselves to the heathen, and <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>were sold to do mischief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now when the kingdom was established before Antiochus, he thought to reign over Egypt that he might have the dominion of two realms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_17">17&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>he entered into Egypt <a href='#FN30'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>with a great multitude, with chariots, and <a href='#FN31'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>elephants, and horsemen, and a great <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>navy, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_18">18&#160;</span>And made war against <a href='#FN33'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Ptolemee king of Egypt: but Ptolemee was afraid of him, and fled; and <a href='#FN34'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>many were wounded to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_19">19&#160;</span>Thus they got the strong cities in the land of Egypt and he took the spoils thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_20">20&#160;</span>And after that Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again in <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred forty and third year, and <a href='#FN36'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>went up against Israel and Jerusalem <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>with a great multitude, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_21">21&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>entered proudly into the sanctuary, and took away <a href='#FN39'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the golden altar, and <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the candlestick of light, and <a href='#FN41'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>all the vessels thereof, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_22">22&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN42'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the table of the shewbread, and <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the pouring vessels, and <a href='#FN44'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the vials. and <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the censers of gold, and <a href='#FN46'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the veil, and <a href='#FN47'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the crown, and the golden ornaments that were before the temple, <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all which he pulled off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_23">23&#160;</span>He took also the silver and the gold, and the <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>precious vessels: also he took the hidden treasures which he found. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_24">24&#160;</span>And when he had taken all away, he went into his own land, <a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>having made a great massacre, and <a href='#FN51'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>spoken very proudly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore there was a great mourning in Israel, in every place where they were; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_26">26&#160;</span>So that the princes and elders mourned, the virgins and young men were made feeble, and the beauty of women was changed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Every bridegroom took up lamentation, and she that sat in the marriage chamber was in heaviness, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_28">28&#160;</span>The land also was moved for the inhabitants thereof, and all the house of Jacob was covered with confusion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And after <a href='#FN54'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>two years fully expired <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ff</a>the king sent his chief collector of tribute unto the cities of Juda, who came unto Jerusalem <a href='#FN56'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>with a great multitude, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_30">30&#160;</span>And spake peaceable words unto them, but all was deceit: for when they had given him credence, he fell suddenly upon the city, and smote it very sore, and destroyed much people of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_31">31&#160;</span>And when he had taken the spoils of the city, he set it on fire, and pulled down the houses and walls thereof on every side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_32">32&#160;</span>But the women and children took they captive, and possessed the cattle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_33">33&#160;</span>Then builded they the city of David with a great and strong wall, and with mighty towers, and made it <a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>gg</a>a strong hold for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_34">34&#160;</span>And they put therein a <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>sinful nation, <a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>wicked men, and fortified themselves therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_35">35&#160;</span>They stored it also with armour and victuals, and when they had gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem, they laid them up there, and so they became a sore snare: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_36">36&#160;</span>For it was <a href='#FN60'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>a place to lie in wait against the sanctuary, and an evil adversary to Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_37">37&#160;</span>Thus <a href='#FN61'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>they shed innocent blood on every side of the sanctuary, and defiled it: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_38">38&#160;</span>Insomuch <a href='#FN62'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>that the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled because of them: whereupon <a href='#FN63'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>the city was made an habitation of strangers, and became strange to those that were born in her; and her own children left her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_39">39&#160;</span><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Her sanctuary was laid waste like a wilderness, <a href='#FN65'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a><a href='#FN66'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>her feasts were turned into mourning, <a href='#FN67'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>her sabbaths into reproach her honour into contempt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_40">40&#160;</span>As had been her glory, so was her dishonour increased, and her excellency was turned into mourning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_41">41&#160;</span>Moreover king Antiochus wrote to his whole kingdom, that all should be one people, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_42">42&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN68'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>every one should leave his laws: so all the heathen agreed according to the commandment of the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_43">43&#160;</span>Yea, many also of the Israelites consented to his <a href='#FN69'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>religion, and sacrificed unto idols, and profaned the sabbath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_44">44&#160;</span>For the king had sent letters by messengers unto Jerusalem and the cities of Juda that they should follow <a href='#FN70'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the strange laws of the land, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_45">45&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN71'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>forbid burnt offerings, and sacrifice, and drink offerings, in the temple; and that they should <a href='#FN72'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>profane the sabbaths and festival days: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_46">46&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN73'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>pollute the sanctuary and holy people: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_47">47&#160;</span><a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Set up altars, and <a href='#FN75'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>groves, and <a href='#FN76'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>chapels of idols, and <a href='#FN77'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>sacrifice swine’s flesh, and <a href='#FN78'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>unclean beasts: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_48">48&#160;</span>That they should also leave their children uncircumcised, and make their souls abominable with all manner of uncleanness and profanation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_49">49&#160;</span>To the end they might forget the law, and change all the ordinances. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_50">50&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN79'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>whosoever would not do according to the commandment of the king, <a href='#FN80'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>he said, he should die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_51">51&#160;</span><a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>In the selfsame manner wrote he to his whole kingdom, and appointed <a href='#FN82'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>overseers over all the people, commanding the cities of Juda to sacrifice, city by city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_52">52&#160;</span>Then many of the people were gathered unto them, to wit every one that forsook the law; and so they committed evils in the land; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_53">53&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And drove the Israelites into <a href='#FN84'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>secret places, even wheresoever they could flee for succour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_54">54&#160;</span>Now the fifteenth day of the month <a href='#FN85'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Casleu, in <a href='#FN86'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred forty and fifth year, they set up <a href='#FN87'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the abomination of desolation upon the altar, and <a href='#FN88'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>builded idol altars throughout the cities of Juda on every side; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_55">55&#160;</span>And burnt incense at the doors of their houses, and in the streets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_56">56&#160;</span>And when they had rent in pieces the books of the law which they found, they burnt them with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_57">57&#160;</span>And whosoever was found with any the book of the testament, or if any <a href='#FN89'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>committed to the law, <a href='#FN90'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the king’s commandment was, that they should put him to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_58">58&#160;</span>Thus did they by their authority unto the Israelites every month, to as many as were found in the cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_59">59&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN91'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the five and twentieth day of the month they did sacrifice upon the idol altar, <a href='#FN92'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>which was upon the altar of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_60">60&#160;</span>At which time according to the commandment <a href='#FN93'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>they put to death certain women, <a href='#FN94'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that had caused their children to be circumcised. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_61">61&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN95'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>they hanged the infants about their necks, and rifled their houses, and slew them that had circumcised them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_62">62&#160;</span><a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved and confirmed in themselves not to eat any <a href='#FN97'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>unclean thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_63">63&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN98'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>they chose rather to die, <a href='#FN99'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>that they might not be defiled with meats, and that they might not profane the holy covenant: so then they died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M11_64">64&#160;</span>And there was very great wrath upon Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M12_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_1">1&#160;</span>In those days <a href='#FN100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>arose Mattathias the son of John, the son of <a href='#FN101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Simeon, a priest of the sons of <a href='#FN102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Joarib, from Jerusalem, and dwelt in <a href='#FN103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Modin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_2">2&#160;</span>And he had five sons, <a href='#FN104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Joannan, <a href='#FN105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>called <a href='#FN106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Caddis: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_3">3&#160;</span>Simon; called Thassi: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Judas, who was called Maccabeus: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>Eleazar, called <a href='#FN109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Avaran: and Jonathan, <a href='#FN110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>whose surname was Apphus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_6">6&#160;</span>And when he saw the blasphemies that were committed in Juda and Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_7">7&#160;</span>He said, Woe is me! wherefore was I born to see this <a href='#FN111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>misery of my people, and of <a href='#FN112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the holy city, and to dwell there, when it was delivered into the hand of the enemy, and the sanctuary into the hand of strangers? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_8">8&#160;</span>Her temple is become as a man <a href='#FN113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>without glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Her glorious vessels are carried away into captivity, <a href='#FN115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>her infants are slain in the streets, her young men with the sword of the enemy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_10">10&#160;</span>What nation hath not <a href='#FN116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>had a part in her kingdom and gotten of her spoils? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>All her ornaments are taken away; of a free woman she is become a bondslave. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_12">12&#160;</span>And, behold, our <a href='#FN118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN119'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>sanctuary, even <a href='#FN120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>our beauty and our glory, is laid waste, and <a href='#FN121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the Gentiles have profaned it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_13">13&#160;</span>To what end therefore shall we live any longer? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_14">14&#160;</span>Then Mattathias and his sons <a href='#FN122'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>rent their clothes, and <a href='#FN123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a><a href='#FN124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>put on sackcloth, and mourned very sore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_15">15&#160;</span>In the mean while <a href='#FN125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the king’s officers, such as compelled the people to <a href='#FN126'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>revolt, came into the city <a href='#FN127'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Modin, to make them sacrifice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_16">16&#160;</span>And when many of Israel came unto them, Mattathias also and his sons came together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_17">17&#160;</span>Then answered <a href='#FN128'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the king’s officers, and said to Mattathias on this wise, Thou art a ruler, and an honourable and great man in this city, and <a href='#FN129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>strengthened with sons and brethren: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_18">18&#160;</span>Now therefore come thou first, and fulfil the king’s commandment, like <a href='#FN130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>as all the heathen have done, yea, and the men of Juda also, and such as remain at Jerusalem: so shalt thou and thy house be in the number of the king’s friends, and thou and thy children shall be honoured with silver and gold, and many <a href='#FN131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>rewards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_19">19&#160;</span>Then Mattathias answered and spake with a loud voice, Though all the nations that are under <a href='#FN132'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the king’s dominion obey him, and <a href='#FN133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>fall away every one from the <a href='#FN134'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>religion of their fathers, and give consent to his commandments: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the covenant of our fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>God forbid that we should forsake the law and the ordinances. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>We will not hearken to the king’s words, to go from our <a href='#FN138'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>religion, <a href='#FN139'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>either on the right hand, or the left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_23">23&#160;</span>Now when he had left speaking these words, there came one of the Jews in the sight of all to sacrifice on the altar which was at <a href='#FN140'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Modin, according to the king’s commandment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_24">24&#160;</span>Which thing when Mattathias saw, he was inflamed with zeal, and <a href='#FN141'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>his reins trembled, neither could he forbear to shew his anger <a href='#FN142'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>according to judgment: wherefore he ran, and slew him upon the altar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_25">25&#160;</span>Also the king’s commissioner, who compelled men to sacrifice, he killed at that time, and the altar he pulled down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_26">26&#160;</span>Thus dealt he zealously for the law of God like as <a href='#FN143'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Phinees did unto Zambri the son of Salom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_27">27&#160;</span>And Mattathias cried throughout the city with a loud voice, saying, Whosoever is zealous of the law, and maintaineth the covenant, let him follow me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_28">28&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN144'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>he and his sons fled into the mountains, and left all that ever they had in the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_29">29&#160;</span>Then many that <a href='#FN145'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>sought after justice and <a href='#FN146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>judgment <a href='#FN147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>went down into the wilderness, to <a href='#FN148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dwell there: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_30">30&#160;</span>Both they, <a href='#FN149'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>and their children, and their wives; and their cattle; because <a href='#FN150'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>afflictions increased sore upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_31">31&#160;</span>Now when it was told the king’s servants, and <a href='#FN151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the host that was at Jerusalem, in the city of David, that certain men, who had <a href='#FN152'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>broken the king’s commandment, were gone down into <a href='#FN153'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the secret places in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_32">32&#160;</span>They pursued after them a great number, and having overtaken them, they camped against them, and made war against them on the sabbath day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_33">33&#160;</span>And they said unto them, Let that which ye have done hitherto suffice; come forth, and do according to the commandment of the king, and ye shall live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_34">34&#160;</span>But they said, We will not come forth, neither will we do the king’s commandment, <a href='#FN154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>to profane the sabbath day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_35">35&#160;</span>So then they gave <a href='#FN155'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>them the battle with all speed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_36">36&#160;</span>Howbeit they answered them not, neither cast they a stone at them, nor stopped <a href='#FN156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the places where they lay hid; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_37">37&#160;</span>But said, Let us die all in our <a href='#FN157'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>innocency: heaven and earth will testify for us, that ye put us to death wrongfully. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>So they rose up against them in battle on the sabbath, and they slew them, <a href='#FN159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>with their wives and children and their cattle, to the number of a thousand p<a href='#FN160'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>eople. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_39">39&#160;</span>Now when Mattathias and his friends understood hereof, they mourned for them right sore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_40">40&#160;</span>And one of them said to another, If we all do as our brethren have done, and fight not for our lives and laws against the heathen, they will now quickly root us out of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_41">41&#160;</span>At that time therefore they decreed, saying, <a href='#FN161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Whosoever shall come to make battle with us on the sabbath day, we will fight against him; neither will we die all, <a href='#FN162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>as our brethren that were murdered in <a href='#FN163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the secret places. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_42">42&#160;</span>Then came there unto him a company of <a href='#FN164'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Assideans who were mighty men of Israel, even all such as were voluntarily devoted unto the law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_43">43&#160;</span>Also all they that fled for persecution joined themselves unto them, and were <a href='#FN165'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>a stay unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_44">44&#160;</span>So they joined their forces, and smote <a href='#FN166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>sinful men in their anger, and <a href='#FN167'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>wicked men in their wrath: but the rest fled to the heathen for succour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_45">45&#160;</span>Then Mattathias and his friends went round about, and pulled down the altars: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_46">46&#160;</span>And what children soever they found within the coast of Israel uncircumcised, those they circumcised <a href='#FN168'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>valiantly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_47">47&#160;</span>They pursued also after the proud men, and the work prospered in their hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_48">48&#160;</span>So they recovered the law out of the hand of the Gentiles, and out of the hand of kings, neither <a href='#FN170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>suffered they <a href='#FN171'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the sinner to triumph. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_49">49&#160;</span>Now when the time drew near that Mattathias should die, he said unto his sons, Now hath pride and rebuke gotten strength, and the time of destruction, and the wrath of indignation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_50">50&#160;</span>Now therefore, my sons, be ye zealous for the law, and give your lives for the covenant of your fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_51">51&#160;</span>Call to remembrance what acts our fathers did in their <a href='#FN172'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>time; so shall ye receive great honour and an everlasting name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_52">52&#160;</span><a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, <a href='#FN174'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>and it was imputed unto him for righteousness? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_53">53&#160;</span><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Joseph in the time of his <a href='#FN176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>distress kept the commandment a<a href='#FN177'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>nd was made lord of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_54">54&#160;</span>Phinees <a href='#FN178'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>our father <a href='#FN179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a><a href='#FN180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>in being zealous and fervent obtained the covenant of an everlasting priesthood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_55">55&#160;</span><a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Jesus for fulfilling the word was made a judge in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_56">56&#160;</span><a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Caleb for bearing witness before <a href='#FN183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the congregation received the heritage of the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_57">57&#160;</span>David for being <a href='#FN184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>merciful <a href='#FN185'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>possessed the throne of an everlasting kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_58">58&#160;</span><a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Elias <a href='#FN187'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>for being zealous and fervent for the law was taken up into heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_59">59&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, by believing were saved out of the flame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_60">60&#160;</span><a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Daniel for his <a href='#FN190'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>innocency was delivered from the mouth of lions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_61">61&#160;</span>And thus consider ye throughout all ages, that none that put their trust in him shall be overcome. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_62">62&#160;</span><a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Fear not then the words of a sinful man: <a href='#FN192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>for his glory shall be <a href='#FN193'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>dung and worms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_63">63&#160;</span><a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>To day he shall be lifted up and to morrow he shall not be found, because h<a href='#FN195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a><a href='#FN196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>e is returned into his dust, a<a href='#FN197'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>nd his thought is come to nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_64">64&#160;</span>Wherefore, ye my sons, be valiant and <a href='#FN198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>shew yourselves men in the behalf of the law; for by it shall ye obtain glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_65">65&#160;</span>And behold, I know that your brother <a href='#FN199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Simon is a man of counsel, give ear unto him alway: he shall be a father unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_66">66&#160;</span>As for <a href='#FN200'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Judas Maccabeus, he hath been mighty and strong, even <a href='#FN201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>from his youth up: let him be your captain, and <a href='#FN202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fight the battle of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_67">67&#160;</span>Take also unto you all <a href='#FN203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>those that observe the law, and avenge ye the wrong of your people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_68">68&#160;</span>Recompense fully the heathen, and take heed to the commandments of the law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_69">69&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he blessed them, and <a href='#FN205'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>was gathered to his fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M12_70">70&#160;</span>And he died in <a href='#FN206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred forty and sixth year, and his sons buried him in the sepulchres of his fathers at <a href='#FN207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Modin, and all Israel <a href='#FN208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>made great lamentation for him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M13_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_1">1&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN209'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>his son Judas, called Maccabeus, <a href='#FN210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>rose up in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_2">2&#160;</span>And all his brethren helped him, and so did all they that held with his father, and they fought with cheerfulness the battle of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_3">3&#160;</span>So he gat his people great honour, and put on a <a href='#FN211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>breastplate as a giant, and girt his warlike <a href='#FN212'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>harness about him, and he made battles, protecting <a href='#FN213'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the host with his sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_4">4&#160;</span>In his acts he was like a lion, and like a lion’s whelp roaring for his prey. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_5">5&#160;</span>For He pursued <a href='#FN214'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the wicked, and sought them out, and <a href='#FN215'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>burnt up those that vexed his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_6">6&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the wicked <a href='#FN217'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>shrunk for fear of him, and <a href='#FN218'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ff</a>all the workers of iniquity were troubled, because <a href='#FN219'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>salvation prospered in his hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_7">7&#160;</span>He grieved also many kings, and made Jacob glad with his acts, and <a href='#FN220'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>gg</a>his memorial is blessed for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_8">8&#160;</span>Moreover he went through the cities of Juda, destroying <a href='#FN221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the ungodly out of them, and <a href='#FN222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>turning away wrath from Israel: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_9">9&#160;</span>So that he was renowned unto the utmost part of the earth, and he <a href='#FN223'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>received unto him such as were <a href='#FN224'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>ready to perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_10">10&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN225'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Apollonius gathered the Gentiles together, and a great host out of <a href='#FN226'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Samaria, to fight against Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_11">11&#160;</span>Which thing when Judas perceived, he went forth to meet him, and so he smote him, and slew him: many also <a href='#FN227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>fell down slain, but the rest fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_12">12&#160;</span>Wherefore Judas took their spoils, and <a href='#FN228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Apollonius’ sword also, and therewith he fought all his life long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_13">13&#160;</span>Now when Seron, a prince of the army of Syria, heard say that Judas had gathered unto him a multitude and company of the faithful to go out with him to war; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_14">14&#160;</span>He said, I will get me a name and honour in the kingdom; for I will go fight with Judas and them that are with him, who despise the king’s commandment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_15">15&#160;</span>So he <a href='#FN229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>made him ready to go up, and there went with him a mighty <a href='#FN230'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>host of <a href='#FN231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the ungodly to help him, and to be avenged of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_16">16&#160;</span>And when he came near to the going up of <a href='#FN232'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Bethhoron, Judas went forth to meet him <a href='#FN233'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>with a small company: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_17">17&#160;</span>Who, when they saw <a href='#FN234'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the host coming to meet them, said unto Judas, How shall we be able, being so <a href='#FN235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>few, to fight against so great a multitude and so strong, seeing <a href='#FN236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>we are ready to faint with fasting all this day? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_18">18&#160;</span>Unto whom Judas answered, <a href='#FN237'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>It is no hard matter for many to be <a href='#FN238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>shut up in the hands of a few; and with <a href='#FN239'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the God of heaven it is all one, <a href='#FN240'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>to deliver with a great multitude, or a small company: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_19">19&#160;</span>For the victory of battle standeth not in the multitude of an host; but strength cometh from heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_20">20&#160;</span>They come <a href='#FN241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against us <a href='#FN242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in much pride and iniquity to destroy us, and our wives and children, and to spoil us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_21">21&#160;</span>But we fight for our lives and our laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_22">22&#160;</span>Wherefore the Lord himself will overthrow them before our face: and as for you, be ye not afraid of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_23">23&#160;</span>Now as soon as he had left off speaking, he leapt suddenly upon them, and so Seron and his <a href='#FN243'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>host was overthrown before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_24">24&#160;</span>And they pursued them <a href='#FN244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from <a href='#FN245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the going down of Bethhoron unto the plain, where were slain about eight hundred men of them; and the residue fled into the land of the Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_25">25&#160;</span>Then began the fear of Judas and his brethren, and <a href='#FN246'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>an exceeding great dread, to fall upon the nations round about them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_26">26&#160;</span>Insomuch as his fame came unto the king, and all nations talked of the <a href='#FN247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>battles of Judas. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_27">27&#160;</span>Now when <a href='#FN248'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>king Antiochus heard these things, he was full of indignation: wherefore he sent and gathered together all the forces of his realm, even a very strong <a href='#FN249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>army. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_28">28&#160;</span>He opened also his treasure, and gave his soldiers <a href='#FN250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>pay for a year, commanding them to be ready <a href='#FN251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whensoever he should need them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_29">29&#160;</span>Nevertheless, when he saw that the money of his treasures failed and t<a href='#FN252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hat the tributes in the country were small, because of the dissension and plague, which he had brought upon the land i<a href='#FN253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>n taking away the laws which had been of old time; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_30">30&#160;</span>He feared <a href='#FN254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that he should not be able to bear the charges <a href='#FN255'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>any longer, nor to have such gifts to give so liberally as he did before: for <a href='#FN256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>he had abounded above the kings that were before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_31">31&#160;</span>Wherefore, being greatly <a href='#FN257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>perplexed in his mind, he determined to go into <a href='#FN258'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Persia, there to take the tributes of the countries, and to gather much money. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_32">32&#160;</span>So he left <a href='#FN259'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Lysias, a nobleman, and one <a href='#FN260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>of the blood royal, to oversee the affairs of the king from the river Euphrates unto the borders of Egypt: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_33">33&#160;</span>And to bring up <a href='#FN261'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>his son Antiochus, until he came again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_34">34&#160;</span>Moreover he delivered unto him the half of his forces, and <a href='#FN262'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the elephants, and gave him charge of all things that he would have done, as also concerning them that dwelt in Juda and Jerusalem: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_35">35&#160;</span>To wit, that he should send an army against them, to destroy and root out the strength of Israel, and <a href='#FN263'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the remnant of Jerusalem, and <a href='#FN264'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to take away their memorial from that place; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_36">36&#160;</span>And that he should place strangers in all their quarters, and divide their land by lot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_37">37&#160;</span>So the king took the half of the forces that remained, and departed from <a href='#FN265'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Antioch, <a href='#FN266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his royal city, <a href='#FN267'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred forty and seventh year; and having passed the river Euphrates, <a href='#FN268'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he went through <a href='#FN269'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the high countries. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_38">38&#160;</span>Then Lysias chose <a href='#FN270'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Ptolemee the son of Dorymenes, <a href='#FN271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Nicanor, and <a href='#FN272'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Gorgias, mighty men of <a href='#FN273'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>nn</a>the king’s friends: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_39">39&#160;</span>And with them he sent forty thousand footmen, and seven thousand horsemen, to go into the land of Juda, and to destroy it, as the king commanded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_40">40&#160;</span>So they went forth with all their power, and came and pitched by <a href='#FN274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Emmaus in the plain country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_41">41&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN275'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>oo</a>the merchants of the country, hearing the fame of them, took silver and gold very much, with <a href='#FN276'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>servants, and came into <a href='#FN277'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the camp to buy the children of Israel for slaves: a power also of Syria and of the land <a href='#FN278'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of the Philistines joined themselves unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_42">42&#160;</span><a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Now when Judas and his brethren saw that miseries were multiplied, and that the forces did encamp themselves in their borders: for they knew how the king had given commandment to destroy the people, and utterly abolish them; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_43">43&#160;</span>They said one to another, Let us restore the <a href='#FN280'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>decayed fortune of our people, and let us fight for our people and the sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_44">44&#160;</span>Then was the congregation gathered together, that they might be ready for battle, and that they might pray, and ask mercy and compassion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_45">45&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN281'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a><a href='#FN282'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Jerusalem lay void as a wilderness, there was none of her children that <a href='#FN283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>went in or out: <a href='#FN284'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the sanctuary also was trodden down, and aliens kept <a href='#FN285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the strong hold; the heathen had their habitation in that place; and joy was taken from Jacob, and the pipe with <a href='#FN286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the harp ceased. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_46">46&#160;</span>Wherefore the Israelites assembled themselves together, and came to <a href='#FN287'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Maspha, over against Jerusalem; for in <a href='#FN288'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Maspha was the place where they prayed aforetime in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_47">47&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>they fasted that day, and <a href='#FN290'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>put on sackcloth, and cast <a href='#FN291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a><a href='#FN292'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>ashes upon their heads, and <a href='#FN293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a><a href='#FN294'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>rent their clothes, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_48">48&#160;</span>And laid open the book of the law, <a href='#FN295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wherein the heathen had sought to paint <a href='#FN296'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the likeness of their images. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_49">49&#160;</span>They brought also <a href='#FN297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the priests’ garments, and <a href='#FN298'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the firstfruits, and <a href='#FN299'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the tithes: and <a href='#FN300'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the Nazarites they stirred up, <a href='#FN301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>who had accomplished their days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_50">50&#160;</span>Then cried they with a loud voice toward heaven, saying, What shall we do with these, and whither shall we carry them away? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_51">51&#160;</span>For thy <a href='#FN302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>sanctuary is trodden down and profaned, and thy priests are in heaviness, and brought low. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_52">52&#160;</span>And lo, the heathen are assembled together against us to destroy us: what things they imagine against us, thou knowest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_53">53&#160;</span>How shall we be able to stand against them, except thou, O God, be our help? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_54">54&#160;</span>Then sounded they with <a href='#FN303'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>trumpets, and cried with a loud voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_55">55&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>after this Judas ordained captains over the people, even <a href='#FN305'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>captains over thousands, and over hundreds, and over fifties, and over tens. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_56">56&#160;</span>But as for <a href='#FN306'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>such as were building houses, or had betrothed wives, or were planting vineyards, or <a href='#FN307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>were <a href='#FN308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>fearful, those he commanded that they should return, every man to his own house, <a href='#FN309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>according to the law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_57">57&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN310'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the camp removed, and pitched upon the south side of <a href='#FN311'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Emmaus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_58">58&#160;</span>And Judas said, <a href='#FN312'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>arm yourselves, and be valiant men, and see that ye be in readiness against the morning, that ye may fight with these nations, that are assembled together against us to destroy us and our <a href='#FN313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>sanctuary: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_59">59&#160;</span>For it is better for us to die in battle, than to behold the calamities of our people and our <a href='#FN314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M13_60">60&#160;</span>Nevertheless, <a href='#FN315'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>as the will <a href='#FN316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>of God is in heaven, so let him do.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M14_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_1">1&#160;</span>Then took <a href='#FN317'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Gorgias <a href='#FN318'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>five thousand footmen, and a thousand of the best horsemen, and removed out of <a href='#FN319'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the camp by night; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_2">2&#160;</span>To the end he might rush in upon <a href='#FN320'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the camp of the Jews, and smite them suddenly. And the men of <a href='#FN321'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the fortress were his guides. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_3">3&#160;</span>Now when Judas heard thereof he himself removed, and the valiant men with him, that he might smite t<a href='#FN322'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>he king’s army which was at Emmaus, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_4">4&#160;</span>While as yet the forces were dispersed from <a href='#FN323'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_5">5&#160;</span>In the mean season came <a href='#FN324'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Gorgias by night into <a href='#FN325'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the camp of Judas: and when he found no man there, he sought them in the mountains: for said he, These fellows flee from us </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_6">6&#160;</span>But as soon as it was day, Judas shewed himself in the plain with three thousand men, who nevertheless had neither <a href='#FN326'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>armour nor swords to their minds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_7">7&#160;</span>And they saw <a href='#FN327'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the camp of the heathen, that it was strong and well <a href='#FN328'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>harnessed, and compassed round about with horsemen; and these were expert of war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_8">8&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN329'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ff</a>said Judas to the men that were with him, Fear ye not <a href='#FN330'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>their multitude, neither be ye afraid of their assault. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_9">9&#160;</span>Remember how <a href='#FN331'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>our fathers were delivered in the Red sea, when Pharaoh pursued them with an army. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_10">10&#160;</span>Now therefore let us <a href='#FN332'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>cry unto heaven, if peradventure the Lord will have mercy upon us, and remember the covenant of our fathers, and destroy this <a href='#FN333'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>host before our face this day: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>That so all the heathen may know that there is one who delivereth and saveth Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_12">12&#160;</span>Then the strangers lifted up their eyes, and saw them coming over against them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Wherefore they went out of <a href='#FN336'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the camp to battle; but they that were with Judas <a href='#FN337'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>sounded their trumpets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_14">14&#160;</span>So they joined battle, and the heathen being discomfited fled into the plain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_15">15&#160;</span>Howbeit all the hindmost of them were slain with the sword: for they pursued them unto <a href='#FN338'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN339'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Gazera, and unto the plains of <a href='#FN340'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Idumea, and <a href='#FN341'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Azotus, and <a href='#FN342'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Jamnia, so that there were slain of them upon a three thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_16">16&#160;</span>This done, Judas returned again with his host from pursuing them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_17">17&#160;</span>And said to the people, Be not greedy of the spoil inasmuch as there is a battle before us, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_18">18&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN343'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Gorgias and his host are here by us <a href='#FN344'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>in the mountain: but stand ye now against our enemies, and overcome them, and after this ye may boldly take the spoils. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_19">19&#160;</span>As Judas was yet speaking these words, there appeared a part of them looking out of the mountain: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_20">20&#160;</span>Who when they perceived that the Jews had put their host to flight and were burning t<a href='#FN345'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>he tents; for the smoke that was seen declared what was done: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_21">21&#160;</span>When therefore they perceived these things, they were sore afraid, and seeing also <a href='#FN346'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the host of Judas in the plain ready to fight, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_22">22&#160;</span>They fled every one into the land of <a href='#FN347'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>strangers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Then Judas returned to spoil <a href='#FN349'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the tents, where they got much gold, and silver, and <a href='#FN350'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>blue silk, and purple of the sea, and great riches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_24">24&#160;</span>After this they went home, and <a href='#FN351'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>sung a song of thanksgiving, and praised the Lord in heaven: <a href='#FN352'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>because <a href='#FN353'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it is good, because his mercy endureth forever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_25">25&#160;</span>Thus Israel had a great deliverance that day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_26">26&#160;</span>Now all the strangers that had escaped came and told <a href='#FN354'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Lysias what had happened: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_27">27&#160;</span>Who, when he heard thereof, <a href='#FN355'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>was confounded and discouraged,<a href='#FN356'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a> because neither such things as he would were done unto Israel, nor such things as the king commanded him were come to pass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The next year therefore following Lysias gathered together <a href='#FN358'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>threescore thousand choice men of foot, and five thousand horsemen, that he might subdue them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_29">29&#160;</span>So they came into <a href='#FN359'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Idumea, and pitched their tents at <a href='#FN360'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Bethsura, and Judas met them with <a href='#FN361'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>ten thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_30">30&#160;</span>And when he saw that mighty <a href='#FN362'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>army, he prayed and said, Blessed art thou, O Saviour of Israel, <a href='#FN363'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>who didst quell the violence of the mighty man by the hand of thy servant David, and gavest the host of <a href='#FN364'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>strangers <a href='#FN365'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>into the hands of Jonathan the son of Saul, and his armourbearer; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Shut up this army in the hand of thy people Israel, and let them be confounded in their power and horsemen: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_32">32&#160;</span>Make them to be of no courage, and cause the boldness of their strength to <a href='#FN367'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fall away, and let them quake at their destruction: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_33">33&#160;</span>Cast them down with the sword of them that love thee, and let all those that know thy name praise thee with thanksgiving. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_34">34&#160;</span>So they joined battle; and there were slain of the host of Lysias about five thousand men, even before them were they slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_35">35&#160;</span>Now when Lysias saw his army put to flight, and the manliness of Judas’ soldiers, and how they were ready either to live or die valiantly, he went into <a href='#FN368'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Antiochia, and gathered together a company of strangers, and having made his army greater than it was, he purposed to come again into Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_36">36&#160;</span>Then said Judas and his brethren, Behold, our enemies are discomfited: let us go up to cleanse and <a href='#FN369'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dedicate the sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_37">37&#160;</span><a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Upon this all the host assembled themselves together, and went up into mount Sion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>And when they saw <a href='#FN372'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the sanctuary desolate, and <a href='#FN373'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the altar profaned, and <a href='#FN374'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the gates burned up, and shrubs growing in <a href='#FN375'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the courts as in a forest, or in one of the mountains, yea, and the priests’ <a href='#FN376'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>chambers pulled down; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_39">39&#160;</span><a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>They rent their clothes, and <a href='#FN378'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>made great lamentation, and <a href='#FN379'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>cast ashes upon their heads, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_40">40&#160;</span>And fell down flat to the ground upon their faces, and blew an alarm <a href='#FN380'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>with the trumpets, and <a href='#FN381'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>cried toward heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_41">41&#160;</span>Then Judas appointed certain men to fight against <a href='#FN382'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>those that were in the fortress, until he had cleansed the sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_42">42&#160;</span>So he chose priests of blameless conversation, such as had pleasure in the law: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_43">43&#160;</span>Who cleansed the sanctuary, and bare out the defiled stones into an unclean place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_44">44&#160;</span>And when as they consulted what to do with the altar of burnt offerings, <a href='#FN383'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>which was profaned; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_45">45&#160;</span>They thought it best to pull it down, lest it should be a reproach to them, because <a href='#FN384'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the heathen had defiled it: wherefore they pulled it down, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_46">46&#160;</span>And laid up the stones in the mountain of the temple in a convenient place, <a href='#FN385'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>until there should come a prophet to shew what should be done with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_47">47&#160;</span>Then they took <a href='#FN386'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>whole stones according to the law, and <a href='#FN387'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>built a new altar according to the former; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_48">48&#160;</span>And made up the sanctuary, and the things that were within the temple, and hallowed <a href='#FN388'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the courts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_49">49&#160;</span>They made also new holy vessels, and into the temple they brought <a href='#FN389'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the candlestick, and the altar <a href='#FN390'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>of burnt offerings, and <a href='#FN391'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>of incense, and <a href='#FN392'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the table. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_50">50&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN393'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>upon the altar <a href='#FN394'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>they burned incense, and <a href='#FN395'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the lamps that were upon the candlestick they lighted, that they might give light in the temple. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_51">51&#160;</span>Furthermore <a href='#FN396'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>they set the loaves upon the table, and <a href='#FN397'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>spread out <a href='#FN398'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the veils, and finished all the works which they had begun to make. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_52">52&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN399'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>on the five and twentieth day of the ninth month, which is called the month <a href='#FN400'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Casleu, in <a href='#FN401'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred forty and eighth year, they rose up betimes in the morning, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_53">53&#160;</span>And offered sacrifice <a href='#FN402'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>according to the law upon the new altar of burnt offerings, <a href='#FN403'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>which they had made. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_54">54&#160;</span>Look, at what time and <a href='#FN404'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>what day the heathen had profaned it, even in that was it dedicated with songs, and citherns, and <a href='#FN405'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>harps, and <a href='#FN406'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>cymbals. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_55">55&#160;</span>Then all the people fell upon their faces, worshipping and praising <a href='#FN407'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the God of heaven, who had given them good success. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_56">56&#160;</span>And so they kept the dedication of the altar <a href='#FN408'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>eight days and offered burnt offerings with gladness, and sacrificed the sacrifice of d<a href='#FN409'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>eliverance and p<a href='#FN410'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>raise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_57">57&#160;</span>They decked also the forefront of the temple with crowns of gold, and with shields; and <a href='#FN411'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the gates and <a href='#FN412'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the chambers they <a href='#FN413'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>renewed, and <a href='#FN414'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hanged doors upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_58">58&#160;</span>Thus was there very great gladness among the people, for that the reproach of the heathen was put away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_59">59&#160;</span>Moreover Judas and his brethren with the whole congregation of Israel ordained, that the days of <a href='#FN415'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the dedication of the altar should be kept in their season from year to year by the space of eight days, <a href='#FN416'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>from the five and twentieth day of the month <a href='#FN417'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Casleu, with mirth and gladness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_60">60&#160;</span>At that time also they builded up the mount Sion <a href='#FN418'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>with high walls and strong towers round about, lest the Gentiles should come and tread it down a<a href='#FN419'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>s they had done before. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M14_61">61&#160;</span>And they set there a garrison to keep it, and fortified <a href='#FN420'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Bethsura to preserve it; that the people might have a defence against <a href='#FN421'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Idumea.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M15_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN422' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now when the nations round about heard that <a href='#FN423'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the altar was built and t<a href='#FN424'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>he sanctuary renewed as before, it displeased them very much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_2">2&#160;</span>Wherefore they thought to destroy the generation of Jacob that was among them, and thereupon they began to slay and destroy the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_3">3&#160;</span>Then Judas fought against <a href='#FN425'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the children of Esau in <a href='#FN426'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Idumea at <a href='#FN427'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Arabattine, because they besieged Gael: and he gave them a great overthrow, and abated their courage, and took their spoils. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_4">4&#160;</span>Also he remembered the <a href='#FN428'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>injury of the children of <a href='#FN429'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Bean, who had been <a href='#FN430'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>a snare and <a href='#FN431'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>an offence unto the people, in that they lay in wait for them in the ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_5">5&#160;</span>He shut them up therefore in the towers, and encamped against them, and <a href='#FN432'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>destroyed them utterly, and burned the towers of that place with fire, and all that were therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_6">6&#160;</span>Afterward he passed over to <a href='#FN433'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the children of Ammon, where he found a mighty power, and much people, with <a href='#FN434'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>gg</a>Timotheus their captain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_7">7&#160;</span>So he fought many battles with them, till at length they were discomfited before him; and he smote them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_8">8&#160;</span>And when he had taken <a href='#FN435'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Jazar, with <a href='#FN436'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the towns belonging thereto, he returned into Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_9">9&#160;</span>Then the heathen that were at <a href='#FN437'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Galaad assembled themselves together against the Israelites that were in their quarters, to destroy them; but they fled to the fortress of Dathema. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_10">10&#160;</span>And sent letters unto Judas and his brethren, The heathen that are round about us are assembled together against us to destroy us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_11">11&#160;</span>And they are preparing to come and take the fortress whereunto we are fled, <a href='#FN438'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>gg</a>Timotheus being captain of their <a href='#FN439'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>host. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_12">12&#160;</span>Come now therefore, and deliver us from their hands, for many of us are slain: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_13">13&#160;</span>Yea, all <a href='#FN440'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>kk</a>our brethren that were in the places of <a href='#FN441'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN442'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Tobie are put to death: their wives and their children also they have carried away captives, and borne away their <a href='#FN443'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>stuff; and they have destroyed there about a thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_14">14&#160;</span>While these letters were yet reading, behold, there came other messengers from Galilee <a href='#FN444'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>with their clothes rent, who reported on this wise, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_15">15&#160;</span>And said, They of <a href='#FN445'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Ptolemais, and of <a href='#FN446'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Tyrus, and Sidon, and all <a href='#FN447'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Galilee of the Gentiles, are assembled together against us to consume us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_16">16&#160;</span>Now when Judas and the people heard these words, there assembled a great congregation together, to consult what they should do for their brethren, that were in trouble, and assaulted of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_17">17&#160;</span>Then said Judas unto <a href='#FN448'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Simon his brother, Choose thee out men, and go and deliver thy brethren that are in <a href='#FN449'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Galilee, for I and <a href='#FN450'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Jonathan my brother will go into <a href='#FN451'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the country of Galaad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_18">18&#160;</span>So he left <a href='#FN452'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains of the people, with the remnant of the host in Judea to keep it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_19">19&#160;</span>Unto whom he gave commandment, saying, Take ye the charge of this people, and <a href='#FN453'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>see that ye make not war against the heathen until the time that we come again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_20">20&#160;</span>Now unto Simon were given three thousand men to go into <a href='#FN454'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Galilee, and unto Judas eight thousand men for <a href='#FN455'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the country of Galaad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_21">21&#160;</span>Then went Simon into Galilee, where he fought many battles with the heathen, so that the heathen were discomfited by him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_22">22&#160;</span>And he pursued them unto the gate of <a href='#FN456'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Ptolemais; and there were slain of the heathen about three thousand men, whose spoils he took. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_23">23&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN457'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>those that were in Galilee, and in <a href='#FN458'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Arbattis, with their wives and their children, and all that they had, took he away with him, and brought them into Judea with great joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Judas Maccabeus also and his brother Jonathan went over Jordan, and travelled three days’ journey in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_25">25&#160;</span>Where they met with the <a href='#FN460'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Nabathites, who came unto them in a peaceable manner, and told them every thing that had happened to their brethren in <a href='#FN461'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the land of Galaad: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_26">26&#160;</span>And how that many of them were shut up in <a href='#FN462'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Bosora, and <a href='#FN463'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Bosor, and Alema, <a href='#FN464'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Casphor, <a href='#FN465'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Maked, and <a href='#FN466'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Carnaim; all these cities are strong and great: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_27">27&#160;</span>And that they were shut up in the rest of the cities of the country of <a href='#FN467'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Galaad, and that against to morrow <a href='#FN468'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they had appointed to bring their host against the forts, and to take them, and to destroy them all in one day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_28">28&#160;</span>Hereupon Judas and his <a href='#FN469'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>host turned suddenly by the way of the wilderness unto <a href='#FN470'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Bosora; and when he had won the city, <a href='#FN471'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>he slew all the males <a href='#FN472'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>with the edge of the sword, and took all their spoils, and burned the city with fire, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_29">29&#160;</span>From whence he removed by night, and went till he came to <a href='#FN473'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the fortress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_30">30&#160;</span>And betimes in the morning they <a href='#FN474'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>looked up, and, behold, there was an innumerable people bearing ladders and other engines of war, to take the fortress: for<a href='#FN475'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> they assaulted them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_31">31&#160;</span>When Judas therefore saw that the battle was begun, and that <a href='#FN476'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the cry of the city went up to heaven, with trumpets, and a great sound, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_32">32&#160;</span>He said unto his host, Fight this day for your brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_33">33&#160;</span>So he went forth behind them <a href='#FN477'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>in three companies, who sounded their trumpets, and cried with prayer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_34">34&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN478'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the host of Timotheus, knowing that it was Maccabeus, fled from him: wherefore he smote them with a great slaughter; so that there were killed of them that day about eight thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_35">35&#160;</span>This done, Judas turned aside to <a href='#FN479'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Maspha; and after he had assaulted it he took and slew <a href='#FN480'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>all the males therein, and received the spoils thereof and and burnt it with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_36">36&#160;</span>From thence went he, and took <a href='#FN481'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Casphon, <a href='#FN482'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Maged, Bosor, and the other cities of the country of Galaad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_37">37&#160;</span>After these things gathered <a href='#FN483'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Timotheus another <a href='#FN484'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>host and encamped against Raphon beyond the brook. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_38">38&#160;</span>So Judas sent men to espy <a href='#FN485'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the host, who brought him word, saying, All the heathen that be round about us are assembled unto them, even a very great host. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_39">39&#160;</span>He hath also hired the <a href='#FN486'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Arabians to help them and they have pitched their tents beyond the brook, ready to come and fight against thee. Upon this Judas went to meet them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_40">40&#160;</span>Then Timotheus said unto the captains of his host, When Judas and his <a href='#FN487'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>host come near the brook, if he pass over first unto us, we shall not be able to withstand him; for he will mightily prevail against us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_41">41&#160;</span>But if he be afraid, and camp beyond the river, we shall go over unto him, and prevail against him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_42">42&#160;</span>Now when Judas came near the brook, he caused <a href='#FN488'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the scribes of the people to remain by the brook: unto whom he gave commandment, saying, Suffer no man to remain in the camp, but let all come to the battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_43">43&#160;</span>So he went first over unto them, and all the people after him: <a href='#FN489'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>then all the heathen, being discomfited before him, cast away their weapons, and fled unto the temple that was at <a href='#FN490'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Carnaim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_44">44&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN491'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they took the city, and <a href='#FN492'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>burned the temple with all that were therein. Thus was <a href='#FN493'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Carnaim subdued, neither could they stand any longer before Judas. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_45">45&#160;</span>Then Judas gathered together all the Israelites that were in the country of Galaad, <a href='#FN494'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>from the least unto the greatest, even their wives, and their children, and their <a href='#FN495'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>stuff, a very great <a href='#FN496'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>host, to the end they might come into the land of Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_46">46&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN497'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>when they came unto Ephron, (this was a great city in <a href='#FN498'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the way as they should go, very well fortified) they could not turn from it, <a href='#FN499'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>either on the right hand or the left, but must needs pass through the midst of it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_47">47&#160;</span>Then they of the city shut them out, and stopped up the gates with stones. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_48">48&#160;</span>Whereupon Judas sent unto them in peaceable manner, saying, <a href='#FN500'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Let us pass through your land to go into our own country, and none shall do you any hurt; we will only pass through on foot: howbeit they would not open unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_49">49&#160;</span>Wherefore Judas commanded a proclamation to be made throughout <a href='#FN501'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the host, that every man should pitch his tent in the place where he was. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_50">50&#160;</span>So the soldiers pitched, and assaulted the city all that day and all that night, till at the length <a href='#FN502'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the city was delivered into his hands: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_51">51&#160;</span><a href='#FN503' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Who then slew all the males <a href='#FN504'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>with the edge of the sword, and rased the city, and took the spoils thereof, and passed through the city over them that were slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_52">52&#160;</span>After this <a href='#FN505'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>went they over Jordan <a href='#FN506'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>into the great plain before <a href='#FN507'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Bethsan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_53">53&#160;</span>And Judas gathered together those that <a href='#FN508'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>came behind, and <a href='#FN509'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>exhorted the people all the way through, till they came into the land of Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_54">54&#160;</span>So they went up to mount Sion with joy and gladness, where they offered <a href='#FN510'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>burnt offerings, because not one of them were slain <a href='#FN511'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>until they had returned in peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_55">55&#160;</span>Now what time as <a href='#FN512'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Judas and Jonathan were in the land of Galaad, and <a href='#FN513'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Simon his brother in Galilee before <a href='#FN514'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Ptolemais, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_56">56&#160;</span><a href='#FN515' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains of the garrisons, heard of the valiant acts and warlike deeds which they had done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_57">57&#160;</span>Wherefore they said, <a href='#FN516'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Let us also get us a name, and go fight against the heathen that are round about us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_58">58&#160;</span>So when they had given charge unto the garrison that was with them, they went toward <a href='#FN517'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Jamnia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_59">59&#160;</span>Then came <a href='#FN518'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Gorgias and his men out of <a href='#FN519'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the city <a href='#FN520'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to fight against them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_60">60&#160;</span>And so it was, that <a href='#FN521'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Joseph and Azarias were put to flight, and pursued unto the borders of Judea: and there were slain that day of the people of Israel about two thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_61">61&#160;</span>Thus was there a great overthrow among the children of Israel, <a href='#FN522'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>because they were not obedient unto Judas and his brethren, but thought to do some valiant act. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_62">62&#160;</span>Moreover these men came not of the seed of those, by whose hand deliverance was given unto Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_63">63&#160;</span>Howbeit the man Judas and his brethren were greatly renowned in the sight of all Israel, and of all the heathen, wheresoever their name was heard of; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_64">64&#160;</span>Insomuch as the people assembled unto them with joyful acclamations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_65">65&#160;</span>Afterward <a href='#FN523'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>went Judas forth with his brethren, and fought against <a href='#FN524'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the children of Esau in the land toward the south, where he smote <a href='#FN525'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Hebron, and the <a href='#FN526'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>towns thereof, and pulled down the fortress of it, and burned the towers thereof round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_66">66&#160;</span>From thence he removed to go into the land of <a href='#FN527'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the Philistines, and passed through <a href='#FN528'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_67">67&#160;</span>At that time certain priests, desirous to shew their valour, were slain in battle, for that they went out to fight unadvisedly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M15_68">68&#160;</span>So Judas turned to <a href='#FN529'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Azotus in the land of the Philistines, and when he had pulled down their altars, and burned their carved images with fire, and spoiled their cities, he returned into the land of Judea.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M16_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_1">1&#160;</span>About that time <a href='#FN530'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>king Antiochus travelling through <a href='#FN531'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the high countries heard say, that <a href='#FN532'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Elymais in the country of <a href='#FN533'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>Persia was a city greatly renowned for riches, silver, and gold; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_2">2&#160;</span>And that there was in it a very rich temple, wherein were <a href='#FN534'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>coverings of gold, and breastplates, and <a href='#FN535'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shields, which <a href='#FN536'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Alexander, son of Philip, the Macedonian king, <a href='#FN537'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>who reigned first among the Grecians, had left there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_3">3&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN538'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he came and sought to take the city, and to spoil it; but he was not able, because they of the city, having had warning thereof, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_4">4&#160;</span>Rose up against him in battle: so he fled, and departed thence with great heaviness, and returned to <a href='#FN539'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover there came one who brought him tidings <a href='#FN540'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>dd</a>into Persia, that the armies, which went against the land of Judea, were put to flight: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_6">6&#160;</span>And that <a href='#FN541'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Lysias, who went forth first with a great power was driven away of the Jews; and that they were made strong by the armour, and power, and s<a href='#FN542'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>tore of spoils, which they had gotten of the armies, whom they had destroyed: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_7">7&#160;</span>Also that <a href='#FN543'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>they had pulled down <a href='#FN544'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the abomination, which he had set up upon the altar in Jerusalem, and that <a href='#FN545'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they had compassed about the sanctuary with high walls, as before, and his city <a href='#FN546'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Bethsura. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_8">8&#160;</span>Now when the king heard these words, he was astonished and sore moved: <a href='#FN547'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>whereupon he laid him down upon his bed, and fell sick for grief, <a href='#FN548'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>because it had not befallen him as he looked for. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_9">9&#160;</span>And there he continued many days: <a href='#FN549'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>for his grief was ever more and more, and he made account that he should die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_10">10&#160;</span>Wherefore he called for all his friends, and said unto them, The sleep is gone from mine eyes, and my heart faileth for very care. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_11">11&#160;</span>And I thought with myself, Into what tribulation am I come, and how great a flood of misery is it, wherein now I am! for I was <a href='#FN550'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>bountiful and beloved in my power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_12">12&#160;</span>But now I remember the evils that I did at Jerusalem, and that <a href='#FN551'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>I took all the vessels of gold and silver that were therein, and <a href='#FN552'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>sent to destroy the inhabitants of Judea without a cause. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_13">13&#160;</span>I perceive therefore that for this cause these <a href='#FN553'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>troubles are come upon me, and, behold, I perish through great grief in a strange land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_14">14&#160;</span>Then called he for <a href='#FN554'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Philip, one of his friends, who he made ruler over all his realm, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_15">15&#160;</span>And gave him <a href='#FN555'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the crown, and his robe, and his <a href='#FN556'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>signet, to the end <a href='#FN557'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he should bring up his son Antiochus, and nourish him up for the kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN558' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>So king Antiochus died <a href='#FN559'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>there in <a href='#FN560'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred forty and ninth year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_17">17&#160;</span>Now when <a href='#FN561'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Lysias knew that the king was dead, he set up Antiochus his son, <a href='#FN562'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>whom he had brought up being young, to reign in his stead, and his name he called <a href='#FN563'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Eupator. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_18">18&#160;</span>About this time they that were in <a href='#FN564'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the tower shut up the Israelites round about the sanctuary, and sought always their hurt, and the strengthening of the heathen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_19">19&#160;</span>Wherefore Judas, purposing to destroy them, called all the people together to besiege them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_20">20&#160;</span>So they came together, and besieged them in <a href='#FN565'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred and fiftieth year, and he made <a href='#FN566'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>mounts for shot against them, and other engines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_21">21&#160;</span>Howbeit certain of them that were besieged got forth, unto whom some <a href='#FN567'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>ungodly men of Israel joined themselves: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_22">22&#160;</span>And they went unto <a href='#FN568'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the king, and said, How long will it be ere thou execute judgment, and avenge our brethren? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_23">23&#160;</span>We have been willing to serve thy father, and to do as he would have us, and to obey his commandments; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_24">24&#160;</span>For which cause <a href='#FN569'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>they of our nation besiege <a href='#FN570'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the tower, and are alienated from us: moreover <a href='#FN571'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>as many of us as they could light on they slew, and spoiled our inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_25">25&#160;</span>Neither have they stretched out their hand against us only, but also against their borders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_26">26&#160;</span>And, behold, this day are they besieging<a href='#FN572'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a> the tower at Jerusalem, to take it:<a href='#FN573'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a> the sanctuary also and Bethsura have they fortified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_27">27&#160;</span>Wherefore if thou dost not prevent them quickly, they will do the greater things than these, neither shalt thou be able to rule them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_28">28&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN574'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>when the king heard this, he was angry, and gathered together all his friends, and the captains of his army, and those that had charge of the horse. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_29">29&#160;</span>There came also unto him from other kingdoms, and from <a href='#FN575'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>isles of the sea, bands of hired soldiers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN576' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>So that the number of his army was an hundred thousand footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen, and two and thirty <a href='#FN577'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>elephants exercised in battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_31">31&#160;</span>These went through <a href='#FN578'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Idumea, and <a href='#FN579'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>pitched against Bethsura, which they assaulted many days, making engines of war; but they of Bethsura came out, and burned them with fire, and fought valiantly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_32">32&#160;</span>Upon this Judas removed from <a href='#FN580'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the tower, and pitched in Bathzacharias, over against the king’s camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_33">33&#160;</span>Then the king rising very early marched <a href='#FN581'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>fiercely with his host toward Bathzacharias, where his armies made them ready to battle, and sounded the trumpets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_34">34&#160;</span>And to the end they might provoke <a href='#FN582'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the elephants to fight, they shewed them <a href='#FN583'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the blood of grapes and mulberries. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_35">35&#160;</span>Moreover they divided the beasts among the armies, and for every <a href='#FN584'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>elephant they appointed a thousand men, armed with coats of mail, and with helmets of brass on their heads; and beside this, for every beast were ordained five hundred horsemen of the best. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_36">36&#160;</span>These were ready at every occasion: wheresoever the beast was, and whithersoever the beast went, they went also, neither departed they from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_37">37&#160;</span>And upon the beasts were there strong towers of wood, which covered every one of them, and were girt fast unto them with devices: there were also upon every one two and thirty strong men, that fought upon them, beside the Indian that ruled him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_38">38&#160;</span>As for the remnant of the horsemen, they set them on this side and that side at the two parts of the host g<a href='#FN585'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>iving them signs what to do, and being h<a href='#FN586'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>arnessed all over amidst the ranks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_39">39&#160;</span>Now when the sun shone upon the shields of gold and brass, the mountains glistered therewith, and shined like lamps of fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_40">40&#160;</span>So part of the king’s army being spread upon the high mountains, and part on the valleys below, they marched on safely and in order. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_41">41&#160;</span>Wherefore all that heard the noise of their multitude, and the marching of the company, and the rattling of the <a href='#FN587'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>harness, were moved: for the army was very great and mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_42">42&#160;</span>Then Judas and his host drew near, and entered into battle, and there were slain of the king’s army six hundred men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_43">43&#160;</span>Eleazar also, surnamed <a href='#FN588'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Savaran, perceiving that one of the beasts, armed with royal <a href='#FN589'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>harness, was higher than all the rest, and supposing that the king was upon him, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_44">44&#160;</span><a href='#FN590' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Put himself in <a href='#FN591'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>jeopardy, to the end he might deliver his people, and <a href='#FN592'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>get him a perpetual name: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_45">45&#160;</span>Wherefore he ran upon him courageously through the midst of the battle, slaying on the right hand and on the left, <a href='#FN593'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>so that they were divided from him on both sides. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_46">46&#160;</span>Which done, he crept under the <a href='#FN594'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>elephant, and thrust him under, and slew him: whereupon the elephant fell down upon him, and there he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_47">47&#160;</span>Howbeit the rest of the Jews seeing the strength of the king, and <a href='#FN595'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the violence of his forces, turned away from them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_48">48&#160;</span>Then the king’s army went up to Jerusalem to meet them, and the king pitched his tents <a href='#FN596'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against Judea, and against mount Sion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_49">49&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN597'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>with them that were in Bethsura he made peace: for they came out of the city, <a href='#FN598'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because they had no victuals there to endure the siege, it being <a href='#FN599'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>a year of rest to the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_50">50&#160;</span>So the king took Bethsura, and set a garrison there to keep it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_51">51&#160;</span>As for the sanctuary, he besieged it many days: and <a href='#FN600'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>set there artillery with engines and instruments to cast fire and stones, and pieces to cast darts and slings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_52">52&#160;</span>Whereupon <a href='#FN601'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they also made engines against their engines, and held them battle a long season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_53">53&#160;</span>Yet at the last, their vessels being without victuals, (for that it was <a href='#FN602'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the seventh year, and they in Judea that were delivered from the Gentiles, had eaten up the residue of the s<a href='#FN603'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>tore;) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_54">54&#160;</span>There were but a few left in the sanctuary, because the famine did so prevail against them, that they were fain to disperse themselves, every man to his own place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_55">55&#160;</span>At that time <a href='#FN604'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Lysias heard say, that <a href='#FN605'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Philip, whom Antiochus the king, whiles he lived, had appointed to bring up his son Antiochus, that he might be king, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_56">56&#160;</span>Was returned out of <a href='#FN606'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Persia and Media, and the king’s host also that went with him, and that he sought to take unto him the ruling of the affairs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_57">57&#160;</span>Wherefore he went in all haste, and said to the king and the captains of the host and the company, We decay daily, and our victuals are but small, and the place we lay siege unto is strong, and the affairs of the kingdom lie upon us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_58">58&#160;</span>Now therefore let us <a href='#FN607'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be friends with these men, and make peace with them, and with all their nation; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_59">59&#160;</span>And covenant with them, that they shall live after their laws, as they did before: for they are therefore displeased, and have done all these things, because we <a href='#FN608'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>abolished their laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_60">60&#160;</span><a href='#FN609' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>So the king and the princes <a href='#FN610'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>were content: wherefore he sent unto them to make peace; and they accepted thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_61">61&#160;</span>Also the king and the princes made an oath unto them: whereupon they went out of the strong hold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_62">62&#160;</span>Then the king entered into mount Sion; but when he saw the strength of the place, he <a href='#FN611'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>broke his oath that he had made, and gave commandment to pull down <a href='#FN612'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the wall round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M16_63">63&#160;</span>Afterward departed he in all haste, <a href='#FN613'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>and returned unto <a href='#FN614'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Antiochia, where he found <a href='#FN615'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Philip to be master of the city: so <a href='#FN616'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>he fought against him, and took the city by force.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M17_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_1">1&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN617'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred and one and fiftieth year <a href='#FN618'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Demetrius the son of <a href='#FN619'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Seleucus departed from <a href='#FN620'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>Rome, and came up with a few men unto <a href='#FN621'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a city of the sea coast, and reigned there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_2">2&#160;</span>And as he entered into the <a href='#FN622'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>palace of his ancestors, so it was, that <a href='#FN623'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>his forces had taken Antiochus and Lysias, to bring them unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_3">3&#160;</span>Wherefore, when he knew it, he said, Let me not see their faces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_4">4&#160;</span>So his host slew them. Now when Demetrius was set upon the throne of his kingdom, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_5">5&#160;</span>There came unto him all <a href='#FN624'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the wicked and <a href='#FN625'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>ungodly men of Israel, having <a href='#FN626'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Alcimus, who was desirous to be high priest, for their captain: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_6">6&#160;</span>And they accused the people to the king, saying, Judas and his brethren <a href='#FN627'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>have slain all thy friends, and driven us out of our own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_7">7&#160;</span>Now therefore send some man whom thou trustest, and let him go and see what havock he hath made among us, and in the king’s land, and let him punish them with all them that aid them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_8">8&#160;</span>Then the king chose <a href='#FN628'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Bacchides, <a href='#FN629'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>a friend of the king, who ruled <a href='#FN630'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>beyond the flood, and was a great man in the kingdom, and faithful to the king, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_9">9&#160;</span>And him he sent with that wicked Alcimus, whom he made high priest, and commanded that he should take vengeance of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_10">10&#160;</span>So they departed, and came with a great power into the land of Judea, where they sent messengers to Judas and his brethren with peaceable words deceitfully. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_11">11&#160;</span>But they gave no heed to their words; for they saw that they were come with a great power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_12">12&#160;</span>Then did there assemble unto Alcimus and <a href='#FN631'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Bacchides a company of <a href='#FN632'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>scribes, to require justice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_13">13&#160;</span>Now the <a href='#FN633'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Assideans were the first among the children of Israel that sought peace of them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_14">14&#160;</span>For said they, <a href='#FN634'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ii</a>One that is a priest of the seed of Aaron is come with this army, and he will do us no wrong. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_15">15&#160;</span>So he spake unto them, peaceably, and sware unto them, saying, we will procure the harm neither of you nor your friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_16">16&#160;</span>Whereupon they believed him: howbeit he took of them threescore men, and slew them in one day, according to the words which <a href='#FN635'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>he wrote, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN636' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>The flesh of thy saints have they cast out, and their blood have they shed round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_18">18&#160;</span>Wherefore the fear and dread of them fell upon all the people, who said, There is neither truth nor <a href='#FN637'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>righteousness in them; for they have broken the covenant and oath that they made. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_19">19&#160;</span>After this, removed<a href='#FN638'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a> Bacchides from Jerusalem, and pitched his tents in Bezeth, where he sent and took many of the men that had<a href='#FN639'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a> forsaken him, and certain of the people also, and when he had slain them,<a href='#FN640'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a> he cast them into the great pit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_20">20&#160;</span>Then committed he the country to Alcimus, and left with him a power to aid him: so <a href='#FN641'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Bacchides went to the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_21">21&#160;</span>But Alcimus <a href='#FN642'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>contended for the high priesthood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_22">22&#160;</span>And unto him resorted all such as troubled the people, who, after they had gotten the land of Juda into their power, did much hurt in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_23">23&#160;</span>Now when Judas saw all the mischief that Alcimus and his company had done among the Israelites, even above the heathen, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_24">24&#160;</span>He went out into all the coasts of Judea round about, and took vengeance of them that had <a href='#FN643'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>revolted from him, so that they durst no more <a href='#FN644'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>go forth into the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_25">25&#160;</span>On the other side, when Alcimus saw that Judas and his company <a href='#FN645'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>had gotten the upper hand, and knew that he was not able <a href='#FN646'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to abide their force, <a href='#FN647'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>he went again to the king, and said all the worst of them that he could. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_26">26&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN648'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the king sent <a href='#FN649'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Nicanor, one of his honourable princes, a man that bare deadly hate unto Israel, with commandment to destroy the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN650' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a><a href='#FN651' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>So Nicanor came to Jerusalem with a great force; and sent unto Judas and his brethren deceitfully with <a href='#FN652'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>friendly words, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_28">28&#160;</span>Let there be no battle between me and you; I will come with a few men, that I may <a href='#FN653'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>see you in peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_29">29&#160;</span>He came therefore to Judas, and they saluted one another peaceably. Howbeit the enemies were prepared to take away Judas by violence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_30">30&#160;</span>Which thing after it was known to Judas, to wit, that he came unto him with deceit, he was sore afraid of him, and would see his face no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN654' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Nicanor also, when he saw that his counsel was discovered, went out to <a href='#FN655'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fight against Judas beside <a href='#FN656'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Capharsalama: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_32">32&#160;</span>Where there were slain of <a href='#FN657'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Nicanor’s side about five thousand men, and the rest fled into the city of David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_33">33&#160;</span>After this went <a href='#FN658'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Nicanor up <a href='#FN659'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>to mount Sion, and <a href='#FN660'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>there came out of the sanctuary certain of the priests and certain of the elders of the people, to salute him peaceably, and to shew him the burnt sacrifice that was offered <a href='#FN661'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>for the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_34">34&#160;</span>But he mocked them, and laughed at them, and <a href='#FN662'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>abused them shamefully, and spake proudly, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_35">35&#160;</span>And sware in his wrath, saying, Unless Judas and his host be now delivered into my hands, if ever I come again <a href='#FN663'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in safety, I will burn up this house: and with that he went out in a great rage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_36">36&#160;</span>Then the priests <a href='#FN664'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>entered in, and stood <a href='#FN665'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>before the altar and the temple, weeping, and saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_37">37&#160;</span>Thou, O Lord, <a href='#FN666'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>didst choose this house to be called by thy name, and to be <a href='#FN667'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>a house of prayer and petition for thy people: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_38">38&#160;</span>Be avenged of this man and his host, and let them fall by the sword: remember their blasphemies, and suffer them not to continue any longer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_39">39&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN668'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Nicanor went out of Jerusalem, and pitched his tents in <a href='#FN669'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Bethhoron, where an host out of Syria met him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_40">40&#160;</span>But Judas pitched in <a href='#FN670'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Adasa with three thousand men, and there <a href='#FN671'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>he prayed, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_41">41&#160;</span>O Lord, when they that were sent from the king of the Assyrians blasphemed, <a href='#FN672'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>thine angel went out, and smote an hundred fourscore and five thousand of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_42">42&#160;</span>Even so destroy thou this host before us this day, that the rest may know that <a href='#FN673'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he hath spoken blasphemously against thy sanctuary, and judge thou him according to his wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_43">43&#160;</span>So the thirteenth day of the month <a href='#FN674'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Adar the hosts joined battle: but Nicanor’s host was discomfited, and <a href='#FN675'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>he himself was first slain in the battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_44">44&#160;</span>Now when Nicanor’s host saw that he was slain, they cast away their weapons, and fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_45">45&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN676'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they pursued after them a day’s journey, from <a href='#FN677'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Adasa unto <a href='#FN678'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Gazera, sounding an alarm after them <a href='#FN679'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>with their trumpets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_46">46&#160;</span>Whereupon they came forth out of all the towns of Judea round about, and closed them in; so that they, turning back upon them that pursued them, were all slain with the sword, and not one of them was left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_47">47&#160;</span>Afterwards they took the spoils, and the prey, and smote off Nicanors head, and his right hand, <a href='#FN680'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>which he stretched out so <a href='#FN681'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>proudly, and brought them away, and hanged them up <a href='#FN682'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>toward Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_48">48&#160;</span>For this cause the people rejoiced greatly, and they kept that day a day of great gladness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_49">49&#160;</span>Moreover <a href='#FN683'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>they ordained to keep yearly this day, being the thirteenth of <a href='#FN684'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Adar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M17_50">50&#160;</span>Thus <a href='#FN685'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the land of Juda was in rest a little while.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M18_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_1">1&#160;</span>Now Judas had heard of <a href='#FN686'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the Romans, that they were mighty and valiant men, and such as would lovingly accept all that joined themselves unto them, and make a league of amity with all that came unto them; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_2">2&#160;</span>And that they were men of great valour. It was told him also of their wars and noble acts which they had done among the <a href='#FN687'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN688'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Galatians, and how they had conquered them, and brought them under tribute; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_3">3&#160;</span>And what they had done in the country of Spain, for the winning of the mines of the silver and gold which is there; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_4">4&#160;</span>And that by their policy and patience they had conquered <a href='#FN689'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the place, though it were very far from them; and the kings also that came against them from the uttermost part of the earth, till they had discomfited them, and given them a great overthrow, so that the rest did give them tribute every year: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_5">5&#160;</span>Beside this, how they had discomfited in battle Philip, and Perseus, king of the <a href='#FN690'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Citims, with others that lifted up themselves against them, and had overcome them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_6">6&#160;</span>How also Antiochus the great king of <a href='#FN691'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Asia, that came against them in battle, having an hundred and twenty <a href='#FN692'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>elephants, with horsemen, and chariots, and a very great army, was discomfited by them; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_7">7&#160;</span>And how they took him alive, and covenanted that he and such as reigned after him should pay a great tribute, and give <a href='#FN693'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>hostages, and that which was agreed upon, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_8">8&#160;</span>And the country of India, and Media and Lydia and of the goodliest countries, which they took of him, and gave to king Eumenes: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_9">9&#160;</span>Moreover how the Grecians had determined to come and destroy them; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_10">10&#160;</span>And that they, having knowledge thereof sent against them a certain captain, and fighting with them s<a href='#FN694'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>lew many of them, and carried away captives their wives and their children, and spoiled them, and took possession of their lands, and pulled down their strong holds, and brought them to be their servants unto this day: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_11">11&#160;</span>It was told him besides, how they destroyed and brought under their dominion all other kingdoms and isles that at any time resisted them; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_12">12&#160;</span>But with their friends and such as relied upon them they kept amity: and that they had conquered kingdoms both far and nigh, insomuch as all that heard of their name were afraid of them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_13">13&#160;</span>Also that, whom they would help to a kingdom, those reign; and whom again they would, they displace: finally, that they were greatly exalted: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_14">14&#160;</span>Yet for all this none of them <a href='#FN695'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>wore a crown or was clothed in purple, to be magnified thereby: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_15">15&#160;</span>Moreover how they had made for themselves a <a href='#FN696'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>senate house, wherein three hundred and twenty men sat in council daily, consulting alway for the people, to the end they might be well ordered: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_16">16&#160;</span>And that they committed their government to <a href='#FN697'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ff</a>one man every year, who ruled over all their country, and that all were obedient to that one, and that there was neither envy nor emmulation among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_17">17&#160;</span>In consideration of these things, Judas chose <a href='#FN698'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Eupolemus the son of John, the son of Accos, and Jason the son of Eleazar, and sent them to <a href='#FN699'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Rome, to make a league of amity and confederacy with them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_18">18&#160;</span>And to intreat them that they would take <a href='#FN700'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the yoke from them; for they saw that the kingdom of <a href='#FN701'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the Grecians did oppress Israel with servitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_19">19&#160;</span>They went therefore to Rome, which was a very great journey, and came into the <a href='#FN702'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>senate, where they <a href='#FN703'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>spake and said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_20">20&#160;</span>Judas <a href='#FN704'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Maccabeus with his brethren, and the people of the Jews, have sent us unto you, to make a confederacy and peace with you, and that we might be registered your confederates and friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_21">21&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN705'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>that matter pleased the Romans well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_22">22&#160;</span>And this is the copy of the epistle which the senate wrote back again <a href='#FN706'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>in tables of brass, and sent to Jerusalem, that there they might have by them a memorial of peace and confederacy: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN707' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Good success be to the Romans, and to the people of the Jews, <a href='#FN708'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>by sea and by land for ever: the sword also and enemy be far from them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_24">24&#160;</span>If there come first any war upon the Romans or any of their confederates throughout all their dominion, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_25">25&#160;</span>The people of the Jews shall help them, as the time shall be appointed, with all their heart: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_26">26&#160;</span>Neither shall they give any thing unto them that make war upon them, or aid them with victuals, weapons, money, or ships, as it hath seemed good unto the Romans; but they shall keep their covenants without taking any thing therefore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_27">27&#160;</span>In the same manner also, if war come first upon the nation of the Jews, the Romans shall help them with all their heart, according as the time shall be appointed them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_28">28&#160;</span>Neither shall victuals be given to them that take part against them, or weapons, or money, or ships, as it hath seemed good to the Romans; but they shall keep their covenants, and that without deceit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_29">29&#160;</span>According to these articles did the Romans make a covenant with the people of the Jews. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_30">30&#160;</span>Howbeit if hereafter the one party or the other shall think to meet to add or diminish any thing, they may do it at their pleasures, and whatsoever they shall add or take away shall be ratified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_31">31&#160;</span>And as touching the evils that <a href='#FN709'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Demetrius doeth to the Jews, we have written unto him, saying, Wherefore thou made <a href='#FN710'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>thy yoke heavy upon <a href='#FN711'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>our friends and confederates the Jews? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M18_32">32&#160;</span>If therefore they <a href='#FN712'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>complain any more against thee, we will do them justice, and fight with thee <a href='#FN713'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>by sea and by land.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M19_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_1">1&#160;</span>Furthermore, <a href='#FN714'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>when Demetrius heard the Nicanor and his host were slain in battle, <a href='#FN715'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he sent <a href='#FN716'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>Bacchides and Alcimus into the land of Judea <a href='#FN717'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the second time, and with them <a href='#FN718'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the chief strength of his host: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_2">2&#160;</span>Who went forth by the way that leadeth to <a href='#FN719'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Galgala, and pitched their tents before Masaloth, which is in <a href='#FN720'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Arbela, and after they had won it, they slew much <a href='#FN721'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_3">3&#160;</span>Also the first month of <a href='#FN722'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred fifty and second year they encamped before Jerusalem: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_4">4&#160;</span>From whence they removed, and went to <a href='#FN723'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Berea, with twenty thousand footmen and two thousand horsemen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_5">5&#160;</span>Now Judas had pitched his tents at <a href='#FN724'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Eleasa, and three thousand chosen men with him: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_6">6&#160;</span>Who seeing the multitude of the other army to be so great were sore afraid; whereupon many conveyed themselves out of the host, insomuch as abode of them no more but eight hundred men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_7">7&#160;</span>When Judas therefore saw that his host slipt away, and that the battle pressed upon him, he was sore troubled in mind, and much distressed, for that he had no time to gather them together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_8">8&#160;</span>Nevertheless unto them that remained he said, Let us arise and go up against our enemies, if peradventure we may be able to fight with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_9">9&#160;</span>But they dehorted him, saying, We shall never be able: <a href='#FN725'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>let us now rather save our lives, and hereafter we will return with our brethren, and fight against them: for we are but few. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_10">10&#160;</span>Then Judas said, <a href='#FN726'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>God forbid that I should do this thing, and flee away from them: if our time be come, let us die manfully for our brethren, and <a href='#FN727'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>let us not stain our honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_11">11&#160;</span>With that the host of Bacchides removed out of their tents, and stood over against <a href='#FN728'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>them, their horsemen being divided into two <a href='#FN729'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>troops, and their slingers and archers going before the host and they that marched in the foreward were all mighty men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_12">12&#160;</span>As for Bacchides, he was in <a href='#FN730'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the right wing: so the host drew near on the two <a href='#FN731'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>parts, and sounded their trumpets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_13">13&#160;</span>They also of Judas’ side, even they sounded their trumpets also, so that the earth shook at the noise of the armies, and the battle continued from morning till night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_14">14&#160;</span>Now when Judas perceived that Bacchides and the strength of his army were on <a href='#FN732'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the right side, he took with him all the hardy men, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_15">15&#160;</span>Who discomfited <a href='#FN733'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the right wing, and pursued them unto the mount <a href='#FN734'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Azotus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_16">16&#160;</span>But when they of the left wing saw that they of the right wing were discomfited, they followed upon Judas and those that were with him hard at the heels from behind: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_17">17&#160;</span>Whereupon there was a sore battle, insomuch as <a href='#FN735'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>many were slain on both parts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_18">18&#160;</span>Judas also was killed, and the remnant fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_19">19&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN736'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Jonathan and Simon took Judas their brother, and buried him in the sepulchre of his fathers in <a href='#FN737'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Modin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_20">20&#160;</span>Moreover they bewailed him, and <a href='#FN738'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>all Israel made great lamentation for him, and mourned many days, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_21">21&#160;</span>How is the valiant man fallen, that delivered Israel! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN739' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>mm</a>As for the other things concerning Judas and his wars, and the noble acts which he did, and his greatness, <a href='#FN740'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>they are not written: for they were very many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_23">23&#160;</span>Now after the death of Judas <a href='#FN741'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the wicked began to put forth their heads in all the coasts of Israel, and there arose up all <a href='#FN742'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>such as wrought iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_24">24&#160;</span>In those days also was there a very great famine, by reason whereof the country revolted, and went with <a href='#FN743'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_25">25&#160;</span>Then Bacchides chose <a href='#FN744'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the wicked men, and made them lords of the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_26">26&#160;</span>And they made enquiry and search for Judas’ friends, and brought them unto Bacchides, who took vengeance of them, and <a href='#FN745'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>used them despitefully. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_27">27&#160;</span>So was there a great affliction in Israel, the like whereof was not since the time that <a href='#FN746'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>a prophet was not seen among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_28">28&#160;</span>For this cause <a href='#FN747'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>all Judas’ friends came together, and said unto <a href='#FN748'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Jonathan, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_29">29&#160;</span>Since thy brother Judas died, we have no man like him to go forth against our enemies, and Bacchides, and against them <a href='#FN749'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>of our nation that are adversaries to us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_30">30&#160;</span>Now therefore we have chosen thee this day to be our prince and captain in his stead, that thou mayest fight our battles. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_31">31&#160;</span>Upon this Jonathan took the governance upon him at that time, and rose up instead of his brother Judas. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_32">32&#160;</span>But when Bacchides gat knowledge thereof, he sought for to slay him </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_33">33&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN750'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Jonathan, and Simon his brother, and all that were with him, perceiving that, fled into <a href='#FN751'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the wilderness of <a href='#FN752'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Thecoe, and pitched their tents by the water of the pool Asphar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN753' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Which when Bacchides understood, he came <a href='#FN754'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>near to Jordan with all his host upon the sabbath day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_35">35&#160;</span>Now Jonathan had sent his brother <a href='#FN755'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN756'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>John, a captain of the people, to pray his friends the <a href='#FN757'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Nabathites, <a href='#FN758'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that they might leave with them their <a href='#FN759'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>carriage, which was much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_36">36&#160;</span>But the children of <a href='#FN760'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jambri came out of <a href='#FN761'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Medaba, and took <a href='#FN762'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>John, and all that he had, and went their way with it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_37">37&#160;</span>After this came word to Jonathan and Simon his brother, that the children of Jambri made a great marriage, and were bringing the bride from <a href='#FN763'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Nadabatha with a great train, as being the daughter of one of the great princes of <a href='#FN764'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Chanaan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_38">38&#160;</span>Therefore they remembered John their brother, and went up, and hid themselves under the covert of the mountain: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_39">39&#160;</span>Where they lifted up their eyes, and looked, and, behold, there was much ado and great <a href='#FN765'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>carriage: and the bridegroom came forth, and his friends and brethren, to meet them with <a href='#FN766'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>drums, and <a href='#FN767'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN768'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>instruments of musick, and many weapons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_40">40&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN769'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Jonathan and they that were with him rose up against them from <a href='#FN770'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the place where they lay in ambush, and made a slaughter of them in such sort, as <a href='#FN771'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>many fell down dead, and the remnant fled into the mountain, and they took all their spoils. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_41">41&#160;</span>Thus was the marriage turned into mourning, and the noise of their <a href='#FN772'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>melody into lamentation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_42">42&#160;</span>So when they had avenged fully the blood of their brother, they turned again to <a href='#FN773'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the marsh of Jordan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_43">43&#160;</span>Now when Bacchides heard hereof, <a href='#FN774'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>he came on the sabbath day unto the banks of Jordan with a great power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_44">44&#160;</span>Then Jonathan said to his company, <a href='#FN775'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>Let us go up now and fight for our lives, for it standeth not with us to day, as <a href='#FN776'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>in time past: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_45">45&#160;</span>For, behold, the battle is before us and behind us, and the water of Jordan on this side and that side,<a href='#FN777'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a> the marsh likewise and wood, neither is there place for us to turn aside. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_46">46&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN778'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>cry ye now unto heaven, that ye may be delivered from the hand of your enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_47">47&#160;</span>With that they joined battle, and Jonathan stretched forth his hand to smite Bacchides, but he turned back from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_48">48&#160;</span>Then Jonathan and they that were with him leapt into Jordan, and swam over unto the other bank: howbeit the other passed not over Jordan unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_49">49&#160;</span>So there were slain of Bacchides’ side that day about <a href='#FN779'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_50">50&#160;</span>Afterward returned Bacchides to Jerusalem and <a href='#FN780'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>repaired the strong cites in Judea; the fort in <a href='#FN781'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Jericho, and <a href='#FN782'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Emmaus, and <a href='#FN783'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Bethhoron, and <a href='#FN784'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Bethel, and <a href='#FN785'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Thamnatha, <a href='#FN786'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Pharathoni, and <a href='#FN787'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN788'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Taphon, these did he strengthen <a href='#FN789'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>with high walls, with gates and with bars. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_51">51&#160;</span>And in them he set a garrison, that they might work malice upon Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_52">52&#160;</span>He fortified also <a href='#FN790'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the city <a href='#FN791'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Bethsura, and <a href='#FN792'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Gazera, and <a href='#FN793'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the tower, and put forces in them, and <a href='#FN794'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>provision of victuals. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_53">53&#160;</span>Besides, he took the chief men’s sons in the country for <a href='#FN795'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>hostages, and put them into <a href='#FN796'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the tower at Jerusalem to be kept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_54">54&#160;</span>Moreover in <a href='#FN797'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred fifty and third year, in the second month, <a href='#FN798'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Alcimus commanded that <a href='#FN799'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the wall of the inner court of the sanctuary should be pulled down; he pulled down also <a href='#FN800'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the works of the prophets </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_55">55&#160;</span>And as he began to pull down, even at that time was Alcimus plagued, and his enterprizes hindered: for his mouth was stopped, and he was taken with a palsy, so that he could no more speak any thing, nor <a href='#FN801'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>give order concerning his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_56">56&#160;</span>So Alcimus died at that time with great torment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_57">57&#160;</span>Now when <a href='#FN802'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Bacchides saw that Alcimus was dead, he returned to the king: whereupon <a href='#FN803'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the land of Judea was in rest two years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_58">58&#160;</span><a href='#FN804' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then all <a href='#FN805'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the ungodly men held a council, saying, Behold, Jonathan and his company are at ease, and dwell without care: now therefore we will bring Bacchides hither, who shall take them all in one night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_59">59&#160;</span>So they went and consulted with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_60">60&#160;</span>Then removed he, and came with a great host, and sent letters privily to his adherents in Judea, that they should take Jonathan and those that were with him: howbeit they could not, because their counsel was known unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_61">61&#160;</span>Wherefore they took of the men of the country, that were authors of that mischief, about fifty persons, and slew them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_62">62&#160;</span>Afterward <a href='#FN806'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Jonathan, and Simon, and they that were with him, got them away to <a href='#FN807'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Bethbasi, which is in the wilderness, and they <a href='#FN808'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>repaired the decays thereof, and made it strong. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_63">63&#160;</span>Which thing when Bacchides knew, he gathered together all his host, and sent word <a href='#FN809'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to them that were of Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_64">64&#160;</span>Then went he and laid siege against Bethbasi; and they fought against it a long season and made engines of war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_65">65&#160;</span>But Jonathan left his brother Simon in <a href='#FN810'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the city, and went forth himself into the country, and with a certain number went he forth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_66">66&#160;</span>And he smote <a href='#FN811'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Odonarkes and his brethren, and the children of Phasiron in their tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_67">67&#160;</span>And when he began to smite them, and came up with his forces, Simon and his company went out of <a href='#FN812'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the city, and burned up <a href='#FN813'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the engines of war, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_68">68&#160;</span>And fought against Bacchides, who was discomfited by them, and they afflicted him sore: for his counsel and travail was in vain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_69">69&#160;</span>Wherefore he was very wroth at <a href='#FN814'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the wicked men that gave him counsel <a href='#FN815'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>to come into the country, inasmuch as he slew many of them, and purposed to return into his own country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_70">70&#160;</span>Whereof when Jonathan had knowledge, he sent ambassadors unto him, <a href='#FN816'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to the end he should make peace with him, and deliver them the prisoners. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_71">71&#160;</span>Which thing he accepted, and did according to his demands, and sware unto him that he would never do him harm all the days of his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_72">72&#160;</span>When therefore he had restored unto him <a href='#FN817'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the prisoners that he had taken aforetime out of the land of Judea, he returned and went his way into his own land, neither <a href='#FN818'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>came he any more into their borders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M19_73">73&#160;</span>Thus the sword ceased from Israel: but Jonathan dwelt at <a href='#FN819'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Machmas, and began to <a href='#FN820'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>govern the people; and he destroyed <a href='#FN821'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the ungodly men out of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M110_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_1">1&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN822'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred and sixtieth year Alexander, <a href='#FN823'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the son of Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, went up and took P<a href='#FN824'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>tolemais: for the people had received him, by means whereof he reigned there, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_2">2&#160;</span>Now when <a href='#FN825'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>king Demetrius heard thereof, he gathered together an exceeding great host, and went forth against him to fight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_3">3&#160;</span>Moreover Demetrius sent letters unto <a href='#FN826'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Jonathan with loving words, so as he magnified him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_4">4&#160;</span>For said he, <a href='#FN827'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Let us first <a href='#FN828'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>make peace with him, before he join with Alexander against us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_5">5&#160;</span>Else <a href='#FN829'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>he will remember all the evils that we have done against him, and against his brethren and his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_6">6&#160;</span>Wherefore he gave him authority to gather together an host, and to provide weapons, that he might aid him in battle: he commanded also that <a href='#FN830'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the <a href='#FN831'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>hostages that were in <a href='#FN832'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the tower should be delivered him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_7">7&#160;</span>Then came <a href='#FN833'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Jonathan to Jerusalem, and read the letters in the audience of all the people, and of them that were in <a href='#FN834'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the tower: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_8">8&#160;</span>Who <a href='#FN835'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>were sore afraid, when they heard that the king had given him authority to gather together an host. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_9">9&#160;</span>Whereupon they of <a href='#FN836'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the tower delivered their <a href='#FN837'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>hostages unto Jonathan, and he delivered them unto their parents. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_10">10&#160;</span>This done, Jonathan settled himself in Jerusalem, and began to build and repair the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_11">11&#160;</span>And he commanded the workmen <a href='#FN838'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>to build the walls and the mount Sion and about with square stones for fortification; and they did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_12">12&#160;</span>Then the strangers, that were in the fortresses<a href='#FN839'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a> which Bacchides had built, fled away; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_13">13&#160;</span>Insomuch as every man left his place, and went into his own country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_14">14&#160;</span>Only at <a href='#FN840'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Bethsura certain of <a href='#FN841'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>those that had forsaken the law and the commandments remained still: for it was their place of refuge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_15">15&#160;</span>Now when king Alexander had heard <a href='#FN842'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>what promises Demetrius had sent unto Jonathan: when also it was told him of the battles and noble acts which he and his brethren had done, and of the pains that they had endured, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_16">16&#160;</span>He said, Shall we find such another man? now therefore we will make him our friend and confederate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_17">17&#160;</span>Upon this he wrote a letter, and sent it unto him, according to these words, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_18">18&#160;</span>King Alexander <a href='#FN843'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>oo</a>to his brother Jonathan sendeth greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_19">19&#160;</span>We have heard of thee, that thou art a man of great power, and meet to be our friend. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_20">20&#160;</span>Wherefore now this day we ordain thee to be the high priest of thy nation, and to be called <a href='#FN844'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the king’s friend; (and therewithal he sent him <a href='#FN845'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>a purple robe and <a href='#FN846'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>a crown of gold:) and require thee <a href='#FN847'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>to take our part, and keep friendship with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_21">21&#160;</span>So in <a href='#FN848'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the seventh month of <a href='#FN849'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred and sixtieth year, <a href='#FN850'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>at the feast of the tabernacles, Jonathan put on <a href='#FN851'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the holy robe, and gathered together forces, and provided much armour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_22">22&#160;</span>Whereof when Demetrius heard, he was very sorry, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_23">23&#160;</span>What have we done, <a href='#FN852'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>that Alexander hath <a href='#FN853'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>prevented us in making amity with the Jews to strengthen himself? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_24">24&#160;</span>I also will write unto them words of encouragement, and promise them dignities and gifts, that I may have their aid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_25">25&#160;</span>He sent unto them therefore to this effect: King Demetrius unto the people of the Jews sendeth greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_26">26&#160;</span>Whereas ye have kept covenants with us, and continued in our friendship, not joining yourselves with our enemies, we have heard hereof, and are glad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_27">27&#160;</span>Wherefore now continue ye still to be faithful unto us, and we will well recompense you for the things ye do in our behalf, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_28">28&#160;</span>And will grant you many <a href='#FN854'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>immunities, and give you rewards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_29">29&#160;</span>And now do I free you, and for your sake I release all the Jews, from <a href='#FN855'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>tributes, and from <a href='#FN856'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the customs of salt, and from <a href='#FN857'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a><a href='#FN858'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>crown taxes, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_30">30&#160;</span>And from <a href='#FN859'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>that which appertaineth unto me to receive for the third part or the seed, and the half of the fruit of the trees, I release it from this day forth, so that they shall not be taken of the land of Judea, nor of <a href='#FN860'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the three governments which are added thereunto out of the country of <a href='#FN861'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Samaria and Galilee, from this day forth for evermore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_31">31&#160;</span>Let Jerusalem also be <a href='#FN862'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>holy and free, with the <a href='#FN863'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>borders thereof, both from <a href='#FN864'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>tenths and <a href='#FN865'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a><a href='#FN866'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>tributes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_32">32&#160;</span>And as for <a href='#FN867'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the tower which is at Jerusalem, I yield up authority over it, and give <a href='#FN868'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the high priest, that he may set in it such men as he shall choose to keep it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_33">33&#160;</span>Moreover I freely set at liberty every one of the Jews, <a href='#FN869'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>that were carried captives out of the land of Judea into any part of my kingdom, and I will that all my officers remit the tributes even of their cattle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_34">34&#160;</span>Furthermore I will that all the feasts, and <a href='#FN870'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>sabbaths, and <a href='#FN871'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>new moons, and solemn days, and the three days before the feast, and the three days after the feast shall be all of <a href='#FN872'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>immunity and freedom for all the Jews in my realm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_35">35&#160;</span>Also no man shall have authority to meddle with or to <a href='#FN873'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>molest any of them in any matter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_36">36&#160;</span>I will further, <a href='#FN874'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>mm</a>that there be enrolled among the king’s forces about thirty thousand men of the Jews, unto whom pay shall be given, as belongeth to all king’s forces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_37">37&#160;</span>And of them some shall be placed in the king’s strong holds, of whom also some shall be set over the <a href='#FN875'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>affairs of the kingdom, which are of trust: and I will that their overseers and governors be of themselves, and that they <a href='#FN876'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>live after their own laws, even as the king hath commanded in the land of Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_38">38&#160;</span>And concerning <a href='#FN877'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the three governments that are added to Judea from the country of <a href='#FN878'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Samaria, let them be joined with Judea, that they may be reckoned to be under one, nor bound to obey other authority than <a href='#FN879'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the high priest’s. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_39">39&#160;</span>As for <a href='#FN880'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Ptolemais, and the land pertaining thereto, I give it as a free gift to the sanctuary at Jerusalem for the necessary expences <a href='#FN881'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of the sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_40">40&#160;</span>Moreover I give every year fifteen thousand shekels of silver out of the king’s accounts from the places appertaining. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_41">41&#160;</span>And all the overplus, which <a href='#FN882'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the officers payed not in as in former time, from henceforth shall be given toward the works of the temple. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_42">42&#160;</span>And beside this, <a href='#FN883'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>the five thousand shekels of silver, which they took from the <a href='#FN884'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>uses of the temple out of the accounts year by year, even those things shall be released, because they appertain to the priests that minister. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_43">43&#160;</span>And whosoever they be that flee unto the temple at Jerusalem, or be within the <a href='#FN885'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>liberties hereof, being indebted unto the king, or for any other matter, let them be at liberty, and all that they have in my realm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_44">44&#160;</span>For the building also and <a href='#FN886'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>repairing of the works of the sanctuary expences shall be given of the king’s accounts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_45">45&#160;</span>Yea, and for <a href='#FN887'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the building of the walls of Jerusalem, and the fortifying thereof round about, expences shall be given out of the king’s accounts, as also for the building of the walls in Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_46">46&#160;</span>Now when Jonathan and the people heard these words, they gave no credit unto them, nor received them, because <a href='#FN888'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>they remembered the great evil that he had done in Israel; for he had afflicted them very sore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_47">47&#160;</span>But with Alexander they were well pleased, because he was the first that entreated of true peace with them, and they were confederate with him always. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_48">48&#160;</span><a href='#FN889' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then gathered king Alexander great forces, and camped over against Demetrius. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_49">49&#160;</span>And after the two kings had joined battle, Demetrius’ host fled: but Alexander followed after him, and prevailed against them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_50">50&#160;</span>And he continued the battle very sore until the sun went down: and that day was Demetrius slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_51">51&#160;</span>Afterward Alexander sent ambassadors to <a href='#FN890'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Ptolemee king of Egypt with a message to this effect: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_52">52&#160;</span>Forasmuch as I am come again to my realm, and am set in the throne of my progenitors, and have gotten the dominion, and overthrown Demetrius, and recovered our country; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_53">53&#160;</span>For after I had joined battle with him, both he and his host was discomfited by us, so that we sit in the throne of his kingdom: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_54">54&#160;</span>Now therefore let us make a league of amity together, and give me now thy daughter to wife: and I will be thy son in law, and will give both thee and her as according to thy dignity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_55">55&#160;</span>Then Ptolemee the king gave answer, saying, Happy be the day wherein thou didst return into the land of thy fathers, and satest in the throne of their kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_56">56&#160;</span>And now will I do to thee, as thou hast written: meet me therefore at <a href='#FN891'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Ptolemais, that we may see one another; for I will marry my daughter to thee according to thy desire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_57">57&#160;</span>So Ptolemee went out of Egypt with his daughter Cleopatra, and they came unto <a href='#FN892'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Ptolemais in <a href='#FN893'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and second year: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_58">58&#160;</span>Where king Alexander meeting him, he gave unto him his daughter Cleopatra, and celebrated her marriage at <a href='#FN894'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Ptolemais with great glory, as the manner of kings is. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_59">59&#160;</span>Now king Alexander had written unto Jonathan, that he should come and meet him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_60">60&#160;</span>Who thereupon went honourably to <a href='#FN895'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Ptolemais, where he met the two kings, and gave them and their friends silver and gold, and many presents, and <a href='#FN896'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>found favour in their sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_61">61&#160;</span>At that time certain <a href='#FN897'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>pestilent fellows of Israel, <a href='#FN898'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>men of a wicked life, assembled themselves against him, to <a href='#FN899'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>accuse him: but the king would not hear them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_62">62&#160;</span>Yea more than that, the king commanded to take off his garments, and <a href='#FN900'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>clothe him in purple: and they did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_63">63&#160;</span>And he made him sit by himself, and said unto his princes, <a href='#FN901'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Go with him into the midst of the city, and make proclamation, that no man <a href='#FN902'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>complain against him of any matter, and that no man <a href='#FN903'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>trouble him for any manner of cause. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_64">64&#160;</span>Now when his <a href='#FN904'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>accusers saw that he was honored according to the proclamation, and clothed in purple, they fled all away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_65">65&#160;</span>So the king honoured him, and <a href='#FN905'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>wrote him among his chief friends, and made him a <a href='#FN906'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>duke, and <a href='#FN907'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>partaker of his dominion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_66">66&#160;</span>Afterward Jonathan returned to Jerusalem with peace and gladness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_67">67&#160;</span>Furthermore in <a href='#FN908'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and fifth year came Demetrius son of <a href='#FN909'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Demetrius out of <a href='#FN910'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Crete into the land of his fathers: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_68">68&#160;</span>Whereof when king Alexander heard tell, he was right sorry, and returned into <a href='#FN911'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Antioch. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_69">69&#160;</span>Then Demetrius made <a href='#FN912'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Apollonius the governor of <a href='#FN913'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Celosyria his general, who gathered together a great host, and camped in <a href='#FN914'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Jamnia, and sent unto Jonathan the high priest, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_70">70&#160;</span>Thou alone liftest up thyself against us, and I am laughed to scorn for thy sake, and reproached: and why dost thou vaunt thy power against us <a href='#FN915'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>in the mountains? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_71">71&#160;</span>Now therefore, if thou trustest in thine own strength, <a href='#FN916'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>come down to us into the plain field, and there let us try the matter together: for with me is the power of the cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_72">72&#160;</span>Ask and learn who I am, and the rest that take our part, and they shall tell thee that thy foot is not able to stand before our face; for thy fathers have been <a href='#FN917'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>twice put to flight in their own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_73">73&#160;</span>Wherefore now thou shalt not be able to abide the horsemen and so great a power in the plain, <a href='#FN918'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>nn</a>where is neither stone nor flint, nor place to flee unto. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_74">74&#160;</span>So when Jonathan heard these words of <a href='#FN919'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Apollonius, he was moved in his mind, and choosing ten thousand men he went out of Jerusalem, where <a href='#FN920'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Simon his brother met him for to help him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_75">75&#160;</span>And he pitched his tents against <a href='#FN921'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Joppa: but; they of Joppa shut him out of the city, because Apollonius had a garrison there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_76">76&#160;</span>Then Jonathan laid siege unto it: whereupon they of the city let him in for fear: and so Jonathan won Joppa. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_77">77&#160;</span>Whereof when Apollonius heard, he took three thousand horsemen, with a great host of footmen, and went to <a href='#FN922'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Azotus <a href='#FN923'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as one that journeyed, and therewithal <a href='#FN924'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>drew him forth into <a href='#FN925'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the plain. because he had a great number of horsemen, in whom he put his trust. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_78">78&#160;</span>Then Jonathan followed after him to <a href='#FN926'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Azotus, where the armies joined battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_79">79&#160;</span>Now Apollonius had left a thousand horsemen in ambush. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_80">80&#160;</span>And Jonathan knew that there was an <a href='#FN927'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>ambushment behind him; for they had compassed in his host, and cast darts at the people, from morning till evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_81">81&#160;</span>But the people stood still, as Jonathan had commanded them: and so the <a href='#FN928'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN929'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>enemies’ horses were tired. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_82">82&#160;</span>Then brought Simon forth his host, and set them against the footmen, (for the horsemen were spent) who were discomfited by him, and fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_83">83&#160;</span>The horsemen also, being scattered in <a href='#FN930'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the field, fled to <a href='#FN931'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Azotus, and went into <a href='#FN932'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Bethdagon, their <a href='#FN933'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>idol’s temple, for safety. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_84">84&#160;</span>But Jonathan set fire on Azotus, and the cities round about it, and took their spoils; and <a href='#FN934'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the temple of Dagon, with them that were fled into it, he burned with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_85">85&#160;</span>Thus there were burned and slain with the sword well nigh eight thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_86">86&#160;</span>And from thence Jonathan removed his host, and camped against <a href='#FN935'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Ascalon, where the men of the city came forth, and met him with great pomp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_87">87&#160;</span>After this returned Jonathan and his host unto Jerusalem, having any spoils. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_88">88&#160;</span>Now when king Alexander heard these things, he honoured Jonathan <a href='#FN936'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>yet more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M110_89">89&#160;</span>And sent him <a href='#FN937'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>a buckle of gold, as the use is to be given to such as are of the king’s blood: he gave him also <a href='#FN938'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Accaron with the borders thereof in possession.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M111_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN939' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And <a href='#FN940'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the king of Egypt gathered together a great host, <a href='#FN941'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>like the sand that lieth upon the sea shore, and many ships, and went about through deceit to get Alexander’s kingdom, and join it to his own. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_2">2&#160;</span>Whereupon he took his journey into Spain <a href='#FN942'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in peaceable manner, so as they of the cities opened unto him, and met him: for king Alexander had commanded them so to do, because he was his brother in law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_3">3&#160;</span>Now as <a href='#FN943'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Ptolemee entered into the cities, he set in every one of them a garrison of soldiers to keep it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_4">4&#160;</span>And when he came near to <a href='#FN944'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Azotus, they shewed him <a href='#FN945'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the temple of Dagon that was burnt, and Azotus and <a href='#FN946'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the suburbs thereof that were destroyed, and the bodies that were <a href='#FN947'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>cast abroad and them that he had burnt in the battle; for they had made heaps of them by the way where he should pass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_5">5&#160;</span>Also they told the king whatsoever Jonathan had done, to the intent he might blame him: but the king held his peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_6">6&#160;</span>Then Jonathan met the king with great pomp at <a href='#FN948'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Joppa, where they saluted one another, and <a href='#FN949'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lodged. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_7">7&#160;</span>Afterward Jonathan, when he had gone with the king to the river called <a href='#FN950'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Eleutherus, returned again to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN951' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>King Ptolemee therefore, having gotten the dominion of the cities by the sea unto <a href='#FN952'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Seleucia upon the sea coast, <a href='#FN953'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>imagined wicked counsels against Alexander. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_9">9&#160;</span>Whereupon he sent ambasadors unto king <a href='#FN954'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Demetrius, saying, Come, let us make a league betwixt us, and I will give thee my daughter whom Alexander hath, and thou shalt reign in thy father’s kingdom: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_10">10&#160;</span>For I repent that I gave my daughter unto him, for he sought to slay me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_11">11&#160;</span>Thus did he slander him, because he was desirous of his kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_12">12&#160;</span>Wherefore he took his daughter from him, and gave her to Demetrius, and <a href='#FN955'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>forsook Alexander, so that their hatred was openly known. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_13">13&#160;</span>Then Ptolemee entered into <a href='#FN956'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Antioch, where he set two crowns upon his head, the crown of <a href='#FN957'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>nn</a>Asia, and of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_14">14&#160;</span>In the mean season was king Alexander in <a href='#FN958'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Cilicia, because those that dwelt in those parts had revolted from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_15">15&#160;</span>But when Alexander heard of this, he came to war against him: whereupon king Ptolemee brought forth his host, and met him with a mighty power, and put him to flight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_16">16&#160;</span>So Alexander fled into <a href='#FN959'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Arabia there to be defended; but king Ptolemee was exalted: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_17">17&#160;</span>For Zabdiel the <a href='#FN960'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Arabian took off Alexander’s head, and sent it unto Ptolemee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_18">18&#160;</span>King Ptolemee also died the third day after, <a href='#FN961'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and they that were in the strong holds were slain one of another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_19">19&#160;</span>By this means <a href='#FN962'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>Demetrius reigned in <a href='#FN963'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and seventh year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_20">20&#160;</span>At the same time <a href='#FN964'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Jonathan gathered together them that were in Judea to take t<a href='#FN965'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>he tower that was in Jerusalem: and he made many engines of war against it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_21">21&#160;</span>Then came <a href='#FN966'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>ungodly persons, who hated their own people, went unto the <a href='#FN967'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>king, and told him that Jonathan besieged <a href='#FN968'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the tower, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_22">22&#160;</span>Whereof when he heard, he was angry, and immediately removing, he came to <a href='#FN969'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Ptolemais, and wrote unto Jonathan, that he should not lay siege to <a href='#FN970'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the tower, but come and speak with him at Ptolemais in great haste. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_23">23&#160;</span>Nevertheless Jonathan, when he heard this, commanded to besiege it still: and he chose certain of the elders of Israel and the priests, and <a href='#FN971'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>put himself in peril; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_24">24&#160;</span>And took silver and gold, and raiment, and divers presents besides, and went to <a href='#FN972'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Ptolemais unto the king, where he <a href='#FN973'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>found favour in his sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_25">25&#160;</span>And though <a href='#FN974'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>certain ungodly men of the people had <a href='#FN975'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a><a href='#FN976'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>made complaints against him, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_26">26&#160;</span>Yet the king entreated him <a href='#FN977'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>as his predecessors had done before, and promoted him in the sight of all his friends, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_27">27&#160;</span>And confirmed him in <a href='#FN978'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the high priesthood, and in all the honours that he had before, and gave him preeminence among <a href='#FN979'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>his chief friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_28">28&#160;</span>Then Jonathan desired the king, that he would make <a href='#FN980'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Judea free from tribute, as also <a href='#FN981'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the three governments, with the country of Samaria; and he promised him three hundred talents. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_29">29&#160;</span>So the king consented, and wrote letters unto Jonathan of all these things after this manner: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_30">30&#160;</span>King Demetrius <a href='#FN982'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>unto his brother Jonathan, and unto the nation of the Jews, sendeth greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_31">31&#160;</span>We send you here a copy of the letter which we did write unto our cousin Lasthenes concerning you, that ye might see it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_32">32&#160;</span>King Demetrius unto his father Lasthenes sendeth greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_33">33&#160;</span>We are determined to do good to the people of the Jews, who are our friends, and keep covenants with us, because of their good will toward us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN983' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Wherefore we have ratified unto them the borders of Judea, with <a href='#FN984'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the three governments of Apherema and <a href='#FN985'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Lydda and <a href='#FN986'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Ramathem, that are added unto Judea from the country of Samaria, and <a href='#FN987'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>all things appertaining unto them, for all such as do sacrifice in Jerusalem, instead of the payments which the king received of them yearly aforetime <a href='#FN988'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>out of the fruits of the earth and <a href='#FN989'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>of trees. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_35">35&#160;</span>And as for other things that belong unto us, of the <a href='#FN990'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>tithes and <a href='#FN991'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>customs pertaining unto us, as also <a href='#FN992'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the saltpits, and the <a href='#FN993'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>crown taxes, which are due unto us, we discharge them of them all for their relief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_36">36&#160;</span>And nothing hereof shall be <a href='#FN994'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>revoked from this time forth for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_37">37&#160;</span>Now therefore see that thou make a copy of these things, and let it be delivered unto Jonathan, and set upon the holy mount in a conspicuous place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_38">38&#160;</span>After this, when king Demetrius saw that the land was quiet before him, and that no resistance was made against him, he sent away all his forces, every one to his own place, except certain bands of strangers, whom <a href='#FN995'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>he had gathered from <a href='#FN996'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the isles of the heathen: wherefore all the forces of his fathers hated him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_39">39&#160;</span>Moreover there was one Tryphon, that had been of Alexander’s part afore, who, seeing that all the host murmured against Demetrius, went to Simalcue the <a href='#FN997'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Arabian that brought up Antiochus the young son of Alexander, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_40">40&#160;</span>And lay sore upon him to deliver him this young Antiochus, that he might reign in his father’s stead: he told him therefore all that Demetrius had done, and how his men of war were at enmity with him, and <a href='#FN998'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>there he remained a long season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_41">41&#160;</span>In the mean time Jonathan sent unto king Demetrius, that he would cast those of <a href='#FN999'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the tower out of Jerusalem, and <a href='#FN1000'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>those also in the fortresses: for they fought against Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_42">42&#160;</span>So Demetrius sent unto Jonathan, saying, I will not only do this for thee and thy people, but I will greatly honour thee and thy nation, if opportunity serve. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_43">43&#160;</span>Now therefore thou shalt do well, if thou send me men to help me; for <a href='#FN1001'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>all my forces are gone from me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_44">44&#160;</span>Upon this Jonathan sent him three thousand strong men unto <a href='#FN1002'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Antioch: and when they came to the king, the king was very glad of their coming. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_45">45&#160;</span>Howbeit they that were of the city gathered themselves together into the midst of the city, to the number of an hundred and twenty thousand men, and would have slain the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_46">46&#160;</span>Wherefore the king fled into the court, but they of the city kept the passages of the city, and began to fight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_47">47&#160;</span>Then the king called to the Jews for help, who came unto him all at once, and dispersing themselves through the city slew that day in the city to the number of an hundred thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_48">48&#160;</span>Also they set fire on the city, and gat many spoils that day, and delivered the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_49">49&#160;</span>So when they of the city saw that the Jews had got the city as they would, their courage was abated: wherefore they made supplication to the king, and cried, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_50">50&#160;</span><a href='#FN1003' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Grant us peace, and let the Jews cease from assaulting us and the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_51">51&#160;</span>With that they cast away their weapons, and made peace; and the Jews were honoured in the sight of the king, and in the sight of all that were in his realm; and they returned to Jerusalem, having great spoils. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_52">52&#160;</span>So king Demetrius sat on the throne of his kingdom, and <a href='#FN1004'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the land was quiet before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_53">53&#160;</span>Nevertheless he dissembled in all that ever he spake, and estranged himself from Jonathan, neither rewarded he him according to the benefits which he had received of him, but troubled him very sore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN1005' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>After <a href='#FN1006'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>this returned Tryphon, and with him <a href='#FN1007'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the young child Antiochus, who reigned, and was crowned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_55">55&#160;</span>Then there gathered unto him all the men of war, whom Demetrius had put away, and they fought against Demetrius, who turned his back and fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_56">56&#160;</span>Moreover Tryphon took the <a href='#FN1008'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>elephants, and won <a href='#FN1009'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Antioch. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_57">57&#160;</span>At that time young Antiochus wrote unto Jonathan, saying, <a href='#FN1010'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>I confirm thee in the high priesthood, and appoint thee ruler over <a href='#FN1011'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the four governments, and to be one of <a href='#FN1012'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the king’s friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_58">58&#160;</span>Upon this he sent him golden vessels <a href='#FN1013'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to be served in, and gave him leave to drink in gold, and <a href='#FN1014'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>to be clothed in purple, and to wear <a href='#FN1015'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a golden buckle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_59">59&#160;</span>His brother <a href='#FN1016'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Simon also he made captain from the place called The ladder of <a href='#FN1017'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>Tyrus unto the borders of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_60">60&#160;</span>Then Jonathan <a href='#FN1018'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>went forth, and passed through the cities beyond the water, and all the forces of Syria gathered themselves unto him for to help him: and when he came to <a href='#FN1019'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Ascalon, they of the city met him honourably. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_61">61&#160;</span>From whence he went to <a href='#FN1020'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Gaza, but they of Gaza shut him out; wherefore he laid siege unto it, and burned <a href='#FN1021'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the suburbs thereof with fire, and spoiled them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_62">62&#160;</span>Afterward, when they of Gaza made supplication unto Jonathan, <a href='#FN1022'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he made peace with them, and took the sons of their chief men for <a href='#FN1023'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>hostages, and sent them to Jerusalem, and passed through the country unto <a href='#FN1024'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Damascus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_63">63&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN1025'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>when Jonathan heard that Demetrius’ princes were come to <a href='#FN1026'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Cades, which is in Galilee, with a great power, purposing <a href='#FN1027'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to remove him out of the country, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_64">64&#160;</span>He went to meet them, and left Simon his brother in the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_65">65&#160;</span>Then Simon encamped against <a href='#FN1028'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Bethsura and fought against it a long season, and shut it up: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_66">66&#160;</span>But they desired <a href='#FN1029'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>mm</a>to have peace with him, which he granted them, and then <a href='#FN1030'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>put them out from thence, and took the city, and set a garrison in it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_67">67&#160;</span>As for Jonathan and his host, they pitched at the water of <a href='#FN1031'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Gennesar, from whence betimes in the morning they gat them to the plain of <a href='#FN1032'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Nasor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_68">68&#160;</span>And, behold, the host of strangers met them in the plain, who, having laid<a href='#FN1033'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a> men in ambush for him in the mountains, came themselves over against him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_69">69&#160;</span>So when <a href='#FN1034'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>they that lay in ambush rose out of their places and joined battle, all that were of Jonathan’s side fled; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_70">70&#160;</span>Insomuch as there was not one of them left, except Mattathias the son of <a href='#FN1035'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Absalom, and Judas the son of Calphi, the captains of the host. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_71">71&#160;</span>Then Jonathan <a href='#FN1036'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>rent his clothes, and <a href='#FN1037'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>cast earth upon his head, and prayed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_72">72&#160;</span>Afterwards turning again to battle, he put them to flight, and so they ran away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_73">73&#160;</span>Now when his own men that were fled saw this, they turned again unto him, and with him pursued them to <a href='#FN1038'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Cades, even <a href='#FN1039'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>unto their own tents, and there they camped. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M111_74">74&#160;</span>So there were slain of the heathen that day about three thousand men: but Jonathan returned to Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M112_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_1">1&#160;</span>Now when Jonathan saw that time served him, he chose <a href='#FN1040'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>certain men, and sent them to <a href='#FN1041'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Rome, for to confirm and renew <a href='#FN1042'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the friendship that they had with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_2">2&#160;</span>He sent letters also to <a href='#FN1043'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>the Lacedemonians, and to other places, for the same purpose. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_3">3&#160;</span>So they went unto <a href='#FN1044'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Rome, and <a href='#FN1045'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>entered into the senate, and said, Jonathan the high priest, and the people of the Jews, sent us unto you, to the end ye should renew the friendship, which ye had with them, and league, as in former time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_4">4&#160;</span>Upon this the Romans gave them letters unto the governors of every place that they should bring them into the land of Judea peaceably. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_5">5&#160;</span>And this is the copy of the letters <a href='#FN1046'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>which Jonathan wrote to the Lacedemonians: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_6">6&#160;</span>Jonathan the high priest, and <a href='#FN1047'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the elders of the nation, and the priests, and the other of the Jews, unto the Lacedemonians their brethren send greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_7">7&#160;</span>There were letters sent in times past unto <a href='#FN1048'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Onias the high priest from <a href='#FN1049'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Darius, who reigned then among you, to signify that ye are our brethren, as <a href='#FN1050'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the copy here underwritten doth specify. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_8">8&#160;</span>At which time Onias entreated the ambassador that was sent honourably, and received the letters, wherein <a href='#FN1051'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>declaration was made of the <a href='#FN1052'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>league and friendship. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore we also, albeit we need none of these things, that we have the holy books of scripture in our hands <a href='#FN1053'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to comfort us, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_10">10&#160;</span>Have nevertheless attempted to send unto you for the renewing of brotherhood and friendship, lest we should become strangers unto you altogether: for there is a long time passed since ye sent unto us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_11">11&#160;</span>We therefore at all times <a href='#FN1054'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>without ceasing, both in our feasts, and other convenient days, do remember you in the sacrifices which we offer, and in our prayers, as reason is, and as it becometh us to think upon our brethren: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_12">12&#160;</span>And we are right glad of your honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_13">13&#160;</span>As for ourselves, we have had great troubles and wars on every side, forsomuch as the kings that are round about us have fought against us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_14">14&#160;</span>Howbeit we would not <a href='#FN1055'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>be troublesome unto you, nor to others of our confederates and friends, in these wars: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_15">15&#160;</span>For we have help from heaven that succoureth us, so as we are delivered from our enemies, and our enemies are brought under foot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_16">16&#160;</span>For this cause we chose <a href='#FN1056'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>kk</a>Numenius the son of Antiochus, and Antipater the son of Jason, and sent them unto the Romans, to renew the amity that we had with them, and the former league. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_17">17&#160;</span>We commanded them also to go unto you, and to salute and to deliver you our letters concerning the renewing of our brotherhood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_18">18&#160;</span>Wherefore now ye shall do well to give us an answer thereto. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_19">19&#160;</span>And this is <a href='#FN1057'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the copy of the letters <a href='#FN1058'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which Oniares sent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_20">20&#160;</span>Areus king of the Lacedemonians to Onias the high priest, greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_21">21&#160;</span>It is found in writing, that <a href='#FN1059'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>the Lacedemonians and Jews are brethren, and that they are of the stock of Abraham: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_22">22&#160;</span>Now therefore, since this is come to our knowledge, ye shall do well to write unto us of your <a href='#FN1060'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prosperity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_23">23&#160;</span>We do write back again to you, that your cattle and goods are our’s, and our’s are your’s We do command therefore our ambassadors to make report unto you on this wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_24">24&#160;</span>Now when Jonathan heard that Demebius’ princes were come to fight against him <a href='#FN1061'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>with a greater host than afore, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_25">25&#160;</span>He removed from Jerusalem, and met them in the land of <a href='#FN1062'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Amathis: for he gave them no respite <a href='#FN1063'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to enter his country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_26">26&#160;</span>He sent spies also unto their tents, who came again, and told him that they were appointed to come upon them in the night season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_27">27&#160;</span>Wherefore so soon as the sun was down, Jonathan commanded his men to watch, and to be in arms, that all the night long they might be ready to fight: also he <a href='#FN1064'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>sent forth centinels round about the host. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_28">28&#160;</span>But when the adversaries heard that Jonathan and his men were ready for battle, they feared, and trembled in their hearts, and <a href='#FN1065'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they kindled fires in their camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_29">29&#160;</span>Howbeit Jonathan and his company knew it not till the morning: for they saw the lights burning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_30">30&#160;</span>Then Jonathan pursued after them, but overtook them not: for they were gone over the river <a href='#FN1066'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Eleutherus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_31">31&#160;</span>Wherefore Jonathan turned to the <a href='#FN1067'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Arabians, who were called <a href='#FN1068'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zabadeans, and smote them, and took their spoils. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_32">32&#160;</span>And removing thence, he came to <a href='#FN1069'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Damascus, and so passed through all the country, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN1070' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Simon also went forth, and passed through the country unto <a href='#FN1071'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Ascalon, and the holds there adjoining, from whence he turned aside to <a href='#FN1072'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Joppa, and won it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_34">34&#160;</span>For he had heard that they would deliver the hold unto <a href='#FN1073'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>them that took Demetrius’ part; wherefore he set a garrison there to keep it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_35">35&#160;</span>After this came Jonathan home again, and calling the elders of the people together, he consulted with them about <a href='#FN1074'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>vv</a>building strong holds in Judea, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_36">36&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1075'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>making the walls of Jerusalem higher, and raising a great mount between <a href='#FN1076'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the tower and the city, for to separate it from the city, that so it might be alone, <a href='#FN1077'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>that men might neither sell nor buy in it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_37">37&#160;</span>Upon this they came together to build up the city, <a href='#FN1078'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>forasmuch as part of the wall toward the brook on the east side was fallen down, and they repaired that which was called Caphenatha. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_38">38&#160;</span>Simon also set up <a href='#FN1079'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Adida in <a href='#FN1080'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Sephela, and made it strong <a href='#FN1081'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>with gates and bars. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_39">39&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN1082'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Tryphon went about to get the kingdom of <a href='#FN1083'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Asia, and <a href='#FN1084'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>to kill Antiochus the king, that he might set the crown upon his own <a href='#FN1085'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_40">40&#160;</span>Howbeit he was afraid that Jonathan would not suffer him, and that he would fight against him; wherefore he sought a way how to take Jonathan, that he might kill him. So he removed, and came to <a href='#FN1086'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Bethsan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_41">41&#160;</span>Then Jonathan went out to meet him with forty thousand men chosen for the <a href='#FN1087'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>battle, and came to <a href='#FN1088'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Bethsan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_42">42&#160;</span>Now when Tryphon saw Jonathan came with so great a force, he durst not stretch his hand against him; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_43">43&#160;</span>But received him honourably, and commended him unto all his friends, and gave him gifts, and commanded his men of war to be as obedient unto him, as to himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_44">44&#160;</span>Unto Jonathan also he said, Why hast thou brought all this people to so great trouble, seeing there is no war betwixt us? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_45">45&#160;</span>Therefore send them now home again, and choose a few men to wait on thee, and come thou with me to <a href='#FN1089'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Ptolemais, for <a href='#FN1090'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>I will give it thee, and the rest of the strong holds and forces, and all that have any <a href='#FN1091'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>charge: as for me, I will return and depart: for this is the cause of my coming. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_46">46&#160;</span>So Jonathan believing him did as he bade him, and sent away his host, who went into the land of Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_47">47&#160;</span>And with himself he retained but three thousand men, of whom he <a href='#FN1092'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sent <a href='#FN1093'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>two thousand into Galilee, and one thousand went with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_48">48&#160;</span>Now as soon as Jonathan entered into <a href='#FN1094'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Ptolemais, they of Ptolemais shut the gates and took him, and all them that came with him they slew with the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_49">49&#160;</span>Then sent Tryphon an host of footmen and horsemen into Galilee, and into <a href='#FN1095'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the great plain, to destroy <a href='#FN1096'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>all Jonathan’s company. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_50">50&#160;</span>But when they knew that Jonathan and they that were with him were taken and <a href='#FN1097'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>slain, they encouraged one another; and went close together, prepared to fight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_51">51&#160;</span>They therefore that followed upon them, perceiving that they were ready to fight for their lives, turned back again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_52">52&#160;</span>Whereupon they all came into the land of Judea peaceably, and there they bewailed Jonathan, and them that were with him, and they were sore afraid; wherefore all Israel made great lamentation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M112_53">53&#160;</span>Then all the heathen that were round about then sought to destroy them: for said they, They have no captain, nor any to help them: now therefore let us make war upon them, and <a href='#FN1098'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>take away their memorial from among men.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M113_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_1">1&#160;</span>Now when <a href='#FN1099'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Simon heard that <a href='#FN1100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Tryphon had gathered together a great host to invade the land of Judea, and destroy it, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_2">2&#160;</span>And saw that the people was <a href='#FN1101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in great trembling and fear, he went up to Jerusalem, and gathered the people together, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_3">3&#160;</span>And gave them exhortation, saying, Ye yourselves know what great things I, and my brethren, and my father’s house, have done for the laws and the sanctuary, the battles also and troubles which we have seen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_4">4&#160;</span>By reason whereof <a href='#FN1102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>all my brethren are slain for Israel’s sake, and I am left alone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_5">5&#160;</span>Now therefore be it far from me, that I should spare mine own life in any time of trouble: <a href='#FN1103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>for I am no better than my brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_6">6&#160;</span>Doubtless I will avenge my nation, and the sanctuary, and our wives, and our children: for all the heathen are gathered to destroy us of very malice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_7">7&#160;</span>Now as soon as the people heard these words, their spirit <a href='#FN1104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>revived. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_8">8&#160;</span>And they answered with a loud voice, saying, Thou shalt be our leader instead of <a href='#FN1105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Judas and <a href='#FN1106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Jonathan thy brother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_9">9&#160;</span>Fight thou our battles, and whatsoever, thou commandest us, that will we do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_10">10&#160;</span>So then he gathered together all the men of war, and made haste <a href='#FN1107'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to finish the walls of Jerusalem, and he fortified it round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_11">11&#160;</span>Also he sent Jonathan the son of <a href='#FN1108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Absolom, and with him a great power, to <a href='#FN1109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Joppa: who <a href='#FN1110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>casting out them that were therein remained there in it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_12">12&#160;</span>So Tryphon removed from <a href='#FN1111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Ptolemaus with a great power to invade the land of Judea, and <a href='#FN1112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Jonathan was with him in ward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_13">13&#160;</span>But Simon pitched his tents at <a href='#FN1113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Adida, over against <a href='#FN1114'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the plain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_14">14&#160;</span>Now when Tryphon knew that Simon <a href='#FN1115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>was risen up instead of his brother Jonathan, and meant to join battle with him, he sent messengers unto him, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_15">15&#160;</span>Whereas we have Jonathan thy brother in hold, it is for money that he is owing unto the king’s treasure, <a href='#FN1116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>concerning the business that was committed unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_16">16&#160;</span>Wherefore now send an hundred talents of silver, and two of his sons for <a href='#FN1117'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>hostages, that when he is at liberty he may not revolt from us, and we will let him go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_17">17&#160;</span>Hereupon Simon, albeit he perceived that they spake deceitfully unto him yet sent he the money and the children, lest peradventure he should procure to himself great hatred of the people: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_18">18&#160;</span>Who might have said, Because I sent him not the money and the children, therefore is Jonathan dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_19">19&#160;</span>So he sent them the children and the hundred talents: howbeit Tryphon dissembled neither would he let Jonathan go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_20">20&#160;</span>And after this came Tryphon to invade the land, and destroy it, going round about by the way that leadeth unto <a href='#FN1118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Adora: but Simon and his host marched against him in every place, wheresoever he went. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_21">21&#160;</span>Now they that were in <a href='#FN1119'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the tower sent messengers unto Tryphon, to the end that he should hasten his coming unto them by the wilderness, and <a href='#FN1120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>send them victuals. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_22">22&#160;</span>Wherefore Tryphon made ready all his horsemen to come that night: but there fell a very great snow, by reason whereof he came not. So he departed, and came into the country of <a href='#FN1121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Galaad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_23">23&#160;</span>And when he came near to <a href='#FN1122'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Bascama he slew Jonathan, who was buried there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_24">24&#160;</span>Afterward Tryphon returned and went into his own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then sent Simon, and took the bones of Jonathan his brother, and buried them in <a href='#FN1124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Modin, the city of his fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_26">26&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>all Israel made great lamentation for him, and bewailed him many days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_27">27&#160;</span>Simon also built a monument upon the sepulchre of his father and his brethren, and raised it aloft to the sight, with hewn stone behind and before. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_28">28&#160;</span>Moreover he set up seven pyramids, one against another, for his father, and his mother, and his four brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_29">29&#160;</span>And in these he made cunning devices, about the which he set great pillars, and upon the pillars he made <a href='#FN1126'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>all their armour for a perpetual memory, and by the armour ships carved, that they might be seen of all <a href='#FN1127'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>that sail on the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_30">30&#160;</span>This is the sepulchre which he made at <a href='#FN1128'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Modin, and it standeth yet <a href='#FN1129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_31">31&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN1130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Tryphon dealt deceitfully with the young king Antiochus, and slew him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_32">32&#160;</span>And he reigned in his stead, and crowned himself king of <a href='#FN1131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Asia, and brought a great calamity upon the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_33">33&#160;</span>Then Simon <a href='#FN1132'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>built up the strong holds in Judea, and fenced them about with high towers, and <a href='#FN1133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>great walls, and gates, and bars, and laid up victuals <a href='#FN1134'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_34">34&#160;</span>Moreover Simon chose men, and sent to <a href='#FN1135'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>king Demetrius, to the end he should give the land an immunity, because <a href='#FN1136'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all that Tryphon did was to spoil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_35">35&#160;</span>Unto whom king Demetrius answered and wrote after this manner: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_36">36&#160;</span>King Demetrius unto Simon <a href='#FN1137'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a><a href='#FN1138'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the high priest, and <a href='#FN1139'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>friend of kings, as also unto the elders and nation of the Jews, sendeth greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_37">37&#160;</span><a href='#FN1140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>The golden crown, and <a href='#FN1141'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the scarlet robe, which ye sent unto us, we have received: and we are ready to make a stedfast peace with you, yea, and to write unto our <a href='#FN1142'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>officers, to confirm the <a href='#FN1143'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>immunities which we have granted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_38">38&#160;</span>And whatsoever covenants we have made with you shall stand; and <a href='#FN1144'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the strong holds, which ye have builded, shall be your own. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_39">39&#160;</span>As for any oversight or fault committed unto this day, we forgive it, and the <a href='#FN1145'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>crown tax also, which ye owe us: and <a href='#FN1146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>if there were any other tribute paid in Jerusalem, it shall no more be paid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_40">40&#160;</span>And look who are meet among you to be in our court, <a href='#FN1147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>let then be enrolled, and let there be peace betwixt us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_41">41&#160;</span>Thus the yoke of the heathen was taken away from Israel in <a href='#FN1148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred and seventieth year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_42">42&#160;</span>Then the people of Israel <a href='#FN1149'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>began to write in their instruments and contracts, In the first year of Simon the high priest, the governor and leader of the Jews. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_43">43&#160;</span>In those days Simon camped against <a href='#FN1150'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Gaza and besieged it round about; he made also an engine of war, and set it by the city, and battered a certain tower, and took it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_44">44&#160;</span>And they that were in the engine leaped into the city; whereupon there was a great uproar in the city: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_45">45&#160;</span>Insomuch as the people of the city <a href='#FN1151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>rent their clothes, and climbed upon the walls with their wives and children, and cried with a loud voice, beseeching Simon <a href='#FN1152'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to grant them peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_46">46&#160;</span>And they said, Deal not with us according to our wickedness, but according to thy mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_47">47&#160;</span>So Simon was appeased toward them, and fought no more against them, but put them out of the city, and cleansed the houses wherein the idols were, and so entered into it <a href='#FN1153'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>with songs and thanksgiving. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_48">48&#160;</span>Yea, he put all uncleanness out of it, and placed such men there as would keep the law, and made it stronger than it was before, and built therein <a href='#FN1154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>a dwellingplace for himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_49">49&#160;</span><a href='#FN1155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>They also of <a href='#FN1156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the tower in Jerusalem were kept so strait, that they could neither <a href='#FN1157'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>come forth, nor go into the country, <a href='#FN1158'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>nor buy, nor sell: wherefore <a href='#FN1159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>they were in great distress for want of victuals, and a great number of them perished through famine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_50">50&#160;</span>Then cried they to Simon, beseeching him <a href='#FN1160'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to be at one with them: which thing he granted them; and when he had put them out from thence, <a href='#FN1161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>he cleansed <a href='#FN1162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the tower from pollutions: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_51">51&#160;</span>And entered into it the three and twentieth day of the second month in <a href='#FN1163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred seventy and first year, with <a href='#FN1164'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>thanksgiving, and <a href='#FN1165'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>branches of palm trees, and with <a href='#FN1166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a><a href='#FN1167'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>harps, and <a href='#FN1168'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>cymbals, and with <a href='#FN1169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>viols, and <a href='#FN1170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>hymns, and songs: because there was destroyed <a href='#FN1171'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>a great enemy out of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_52">52&#160;</span>He ordained also that that day should be kept every year with gladness. Moreover <a href='#FN1172'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the hill of the temple that was by <a href='#FN1173'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the tower he made stronger than it was, and there he dwelt himself with his company. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M113_53">53&#160;</span>And when Simon saw that <a href='#FN1174'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>John his son was a valiant man, he made him captain of all the hosts; and <a href='#FN1175'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>he dwelt in <a href='#FN1176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Gazera.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M114_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_1">1&#160;</span>Now in <a href='#FN1177'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and twelfth year king Demetrius gathered his forces together, and went into <a href='#FN1178'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Media t<a href='#FN1179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>o get him help to fight against Tryphone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_2">2&#160;</span>But when <a href='#FN1180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Arsaces, the king of <a href='#FN1181'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>Persia and <a href='#FN1182'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Media, heard that Demetrius was entered within his borders, he sent one of his princes to take him alive: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_3">3&#160;</span>Who went and smote the host of Demetrius, and took him, and brought him to Arsaces, by whom he was put in ward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_4">4&#160;</span>As for the land of Judea, <a href='#FN1183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that was quiet all the days of Simon; for he sought the good of his nation in such wise, as that evermore his authority and honour pleased them well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_5">5&#160;</span>And as he was honourable in all his acts, so in this, that he took <a href='#FN1184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Joppa for an haven, and made an entrance to the <a href='#FN1185'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>isles of the sea, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_6">6&#160;</span>And enlarged the bounds of his nation, and recovered the country, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_7">7&#160;</span>And gathered together a great number of captives, and had the dominion of <a href='#FN1186'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Gazera, and <a href='#FN1187'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Bethsura, and <a href='#FN1188'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the tower, <a href='#FN1189'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>out of the which he took all uncleaness, neither was there any that resisted him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_8">8&#160;</span>Then did they till their ground in peace, and <a href='#FN1190'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the earth gave her increase, and the trees of the field their fruit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_9">9&#160;</span>The ancient men sat all in the streets, communing together of <a href='#FN1191'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>good things, and the young men <a href='#FN1192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>put on glorious and warlike apparel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_10">10&#160;</span>He provided victuals for the cities, and set in them all manner of munition, so that his honourable name was renowned unto the end of the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_11">11&#160;</span>He made peace in the land, and Israel rejoiced with great joy: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_12">12&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1193'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>every man sat under his vine and his fig tree, and there was none to <a href='#FN1194'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>fray them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_13">13&#160;</span>Neither was there any left in the land to fight against them: yea, the kings themselves were overthrown in those days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_14">14&#160;</span>Moreover he strengthened all those of his people that were brought low: the law he searched out; and every contemner of the law and wicked person he took away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_15">15&#160;</span>He beautified the sanctuary, and multiplied vessels of the temple. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_16">16&#160;</span>Now when it was heard at <a href='#FN1195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Rome, and as far as <a href='#FN1196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Sparta, that Jonathan was dead, <a href='#FN1197'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>they were very sorry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_17">17&#160;</span>But as soon as they heard that his brother Simon was made high priest in his stead, and ruled the country, and the cities therein: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_18">18&#160;</span>They wrote unto him <a href='#FN1198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>in tables of brass, to renew the friendship and league which they had made with <a href='#FN1199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Judas and <a href='#FN1200'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Jonathan his brethren: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_19">19&#160;</span>Which writings were read before the congregation at Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_20">20&#160;</span>And this is the copy of the letters that the <a href='#FN1201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Lacedemonians sent; The rulers of the <a href='#FN1202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Lacedemonians, with the city, unto Simon <a href='#FN1203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>the high priest, and the elders, and priests, and residue of the people of the Jews, our brethren, <a href='#FN1204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>send greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN1205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>The ambassadors that were sent unto our people certified us of your glory and honour: wherefore we were glad of their coming, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_22">22&#160;</span>And did register the things that they spake in the <a href='#FN1206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>council of the people in this manner; <a href='#FN1207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Numenius son of Antiochus, and Antipater son of Jason, the Jews’ ambassadors, came unto us to renew the friendship they had with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_23">23&#160;</span>And it pleased the people to entertain the men honourably, and to put the copy of their <a href='#FN1208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>ambassage in publick records, to the end the people of the <a href='#FN1209'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Lacedemonians might have a memorial thereof: furthermore we have written a copy thereof unto Simon the high priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_24">24&#160;</span>After this Simon sent <a href='#FN1210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Numenius to <a href='#FN1211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Rome with a great shield of gold of a thousand <a href='#FN1212'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>pound weight to confirm the league with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_25">25&#160;</span>Whereof when the people heard, they said, What thanks shall we give to Simon and <a href='#FN1213'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>his sons? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_26">26&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1214'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>he and his brethren and the house of his father have established Israel, and chased away in fight their enemies from them, and confirmed their liberty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_27">27&#160;</span>So then they wrote it <a href='#FN1215'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in tables of brass, which they set upon pillars in mount Sion: and this is the copy of the writing; The eighteenth day of the month <a href='#FN1216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>Elul, in <a href='#FN1217'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and twelfth year, being <a href='#FN1218'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the third year of Simon the high priest, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_28">28&#160;</span>At <a href='#FN1219'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Saramel in the great congregation of the priests, and people, and rulers of the nation, and elders of the country, were these things notified unto us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_29">29&#160;</span>Forasmuch as oftentimes there have been wars in the country, wherein for the maintenance of their sanctuary, and the law, <a href='#FN1220'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Simon the son of Mattathias, of the posterity of <a href='#FN1221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Jarib, together with his brethren, <a href='#FN1222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>put themselves in jeopardy, and resisting the enemies of their nation did their nation great honour: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_30">30&#160;</span>(For after that Jonathan, having gathered his nation together, and <a href='#FN1223'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>been their high priest, <a href='#FN1224'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>was added to his people, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN1225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Their enemies prepared to invade their country, that they might destroy it, and lay hands on the sanctuary: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_32">32&#160;</span>At which time Simon rose up, and fought for his nation, and spent much of his own substance, and armed <a href='#FN1226'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the valiant men of his nation and gave them w<a href='#FN1227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>ages, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_33">33&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>fortified the cities of Judea, together with <a href='#FN1229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Bethsura, that lieth upon the borders of Judea, where the <a href='#FN1230'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>armour of the enemies had been before; but he set a garrison of Jews there: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_34">34&#160;</span>Moreover he fortified <a href='#FN1232'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Joppa, which lieth upon the sea, and <a href='#FN1233'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1234'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Gazera, that bordereth upon <a href='#FN1235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Azotus, where the enemies had dwelt before: but he placed Jews there, and furnished them with all things convenient for the reparation thereof.) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_35">35&#160;</span>The people therefore sang the acts of Simon, and unto what glory he thought to bring his nation, made him their governor and <a href='#FN1236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>chief priest, because he had done all these things, and for the justice and faith which he kept to his nation, and for that he sought by all means to exalt his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_36">36&#160;</span>For in his time <a href='#FN1237'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>oo</a>things prospered in his hands, so that <a href='#FN1238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the heathen were taken out of their country, and <a href='#FN1239'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>they also that were in the city of David in Jerusalem, who had made themselves <a href='#FN1240'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>a tower, out of which they issued, and polluted all about the sanctuary, and did much hurt <a href='#FN1241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the holy place: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_37">37&#160;</span>But he placed Jews therein. and <a href='#FN1242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>fortified it for the safety of the country and the city, and <a href='#FN1243'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>raised up the walls of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_38">38&#160;</span>King Demetrius also <a href='#FN1244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>confirmed him in the high priesthood according to those things, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_39">39&#160;</span>And made him one <a href='#FN1245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>of his friends, and honoured him with great honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_40">40&#160;</span>For he had heard say, that <a href='#FN1246'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the Romans had called the Jews their friends and confederates and brethren; and that <a href='#FN1247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>they had entertained the ambassadors of Simon honourably; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_41">41&#160;</span>Also that the Jews and priests were well pleased that Simon should be their governor and <a href='#FN1248'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>high priest <a href='#FN1249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>for ever, <a href='#FN1250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>until there should arise <a href='#FN1251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>a faithful prophet; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_42">42&#160;</span>Moreover that he should be their captain, and should take charge of the sanctuary, to set them over their works, and over the country, and over the armour, and over the fortresses, that, I say, he should take charge of the sanctuary; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_43">43&#160;</span>Beside this, that he should be obeyed of every man, and that <a href='#FN1252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>all the writings in the country should be made in his name, and that <a href='#FN1253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he should be clothed in purple, and wear gold: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_44">44&#160;</span>Also that it should be lawful for none of the people or priests to <a href='#FN1254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>break any of these things, or to gainsay his words, or to gather an assembly in the country without him, or to be clothed in purple, or wear <a href='#FN1255'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>a buckle of gold; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_45">45&#160;</span>And whosoever should do otherwise, or <a href='#FN1256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>break any of these things, <a href='#FN1257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>he should be punished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_46">46&#160;</span>Thus it liked all the people to deal with Simon, and to do as hath been said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_47">47&#160;</span>Then Simon accepted hereof, and was well pleased <a href='#FN1258'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>to be high priest, and captain and <a href='#FN1259'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>governor of the Jews and priests, and to defend them all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_48">48&#160;</span>So they commanded that this writing should be put <a href='#FN1260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>in tables of brass, and that they should be set up within the compass of the sanctuary in a conspicuous place; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M114_49">49&#160;</span>Also that the copies thereof should be laid up in <a href='#FN1261'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the treasury, to the end that Simon and <a href='#FN1262'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>his sons might have them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M115_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moreover Antiochus son of <a href='#FN1264'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Demetrius the king sent letters from <a href='#FN1265'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the isles of the sea unto Simon the priest and <a href='#FN1266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>prince of the Jews, and to all the people; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>The contents whereof were these: King Antiochus to Simon the high priest and <a href='#FN1268'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>prince of his nation, and to the people of the Jews, greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_3">3&#160;</span>Forasmuch as <a href='#FN1269'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>certain pestilent men <a href='#FN1270'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>have usurped the kingdom of our fathers, and my purpose is to challenge it again, that I may restore it to the old estate, and to that end have gathered a multitude of foreign soldiers together, and prepared ships of war; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_4">4&#160;</span>My meaning also being to go through the country, that I may be avenged of <a href='#FN1271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>them that have destroyed it, and made many cities in the kingdom desolate: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_5">5&#160;</span>Now therefore <a href='#FN1272'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>I confirm unto thee all the oblations which the kings before me granted thee, and whatsoever gifts besides they granted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_6">6&#160;</span>I give thee leave also to coin money for thy country with thine own stamp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_7">7&#160;</span>And as concerning Jerusalem and the sanctuary, let them <a href='#FN1273'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>be free; and all the armour that thou hast made, and <a href='#FN1274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>fortresses that thou hast built, and keepest in thine hands, let them remain unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_8">8&#160;</span>And if anything be, or shall be, owing to the king, <a href='#FN1275'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>let it be forgiven thee from this time forth for evermore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_9">9&#160;</span>Furthermore, when we have obtained our kingdom, we will honour thee, and thy nation, and thy temple, with great honour, so that your honour shall be known throughout the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_10">10&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN1276'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and fourteenth year went Antiochus into the land of his fathers: at which time all the forces came together unto him, so that few were left with <a href='#FN1277'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Tryphon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_11">11&#160;</span>Wherefore being pursued by king Antiochus, he fled unto <a href='#FN1278'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Dora, which lieth by the sea side: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_12">12&#160;</span>For he saw that troubles came upon him all at once, and that his forces had forsaken him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_13">13&#160;</span>Then camped Antiochus against <a href='#FN1279'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Dora, having with him an hundred and twenty thousand men of war, and eight thousand horsemen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_14">14&#160;</span>And when he had compassed the city round about, and joined ships close to the town on the sea side, he vexed the city by land and by sea, neither suffered he any <a href='#FN1280'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>to go out or in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_15">15&#160;</span>In the mean season came <a href='#FN1281'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Numenius and his company from <a href='#FN1282'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Rome, having letters <a href='#FN1283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>to the kings and countries; wherein were written these things: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Lucius, consul of the Romans unto king <a href='#FN1285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>rr</a>Ptolemee, greeting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_17">17&#160;</span>The Jews’ ambassadors, <a href='#FN1286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>our friends and confederates, came unto us to renew <a href='#FN1287'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the old friendship and league, <a href='#FN1288'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>being sent from Simon the high priest, and from the people of the Jews: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_18">18&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>they brought a shield of gold of a thousand pound. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_19">19&#160;</span>We thought it good therefore to write <a href='#FN1290'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>unto the kings and countries, that they should do them no harm, nor fight against them, their cities, or countries, nor yet aid their enemies against them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_20">20&#160;</span>It seemed also good to us to receive the shield of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_21">21&#160;</span>If therefore there be <a href='#FN1291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>any pestilent fellows, that have fled from their country unto you, deliver them unto Simon the high priest, that he may punish them according to their own law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_22">22&#160;</span>The same things wrote he likewise unto <a href='#FN1292'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Demetrius the king, and Attalus, to <a href='#FN1293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ariarathes, and <a href='#FN1294'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Arsaces, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_23">23&#160;</span>And to all the countries and to <a href='#FN1295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sampsames, and the <a href='#FN1296'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Lacedemonians, and to Delus, and Myndus, and Sicyon, and Caria, and <a href='#FN1297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Samos, and <a href='#FN1298'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Pamphylia, and <a href='#FN1299'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Lycia, and Halicarnassus, and <a href='#FN1300'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Rhodus, and <a href='#FN1301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aradus, and <a href='#FN1302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Cos, and Side, and Aradus, and Gortyna, and <a href='#FN1303'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Cnidus, and <a href='#FN1304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Cyprus, and <a href='#FN1305'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Cyrene. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_24">24&#160;</span>And the copy hereof they wrote to Simon the high priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>So Antiochus the king camped against Dora the second day, <a href='#FN1307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>assaulting it continually, and making engines, by which means he shut up Tryphon, that he could neither <a href='#FN1308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>go out nor in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_26">26&#160;</span>At that time Simon sent him two thousand chosen men to aid him; silver also, and gold, and much armour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_27">27&#160;</span>Nevertheless he would not receive them, but <a href='#FN1309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>brake <a href='#FN1310'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>all the covenants which he had made with him afore, and became strange unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_28">28&#160;</span>Furthermore he sent unto him Athenobius, one of his friends, to commune with him, and say, Ye withhold <a href='#FN1311'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Joppa and <a href='#FN1312'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Gazera; with <a href='#FN1313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the tower that is in Jerusalem, which are cities of my realm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_29">29&#160;</span>The borders thereof ye have wasted, and done great hurt in the land, and got the dominion of <a href='#FN1314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>many places within my kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_30">30&#160;</span>Now therefore deliver the cities which ye have taken, and <a href='#FN1315'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the tributes of the places, whereof ye have gotten dominion <a href='#FN1316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>without the borders of Judea: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_31">31&#160;</span>Or else give me for them five hundred talents of silver; and for the harm that ye have done, and the tributes of the cities, other five hundred talents: if not, we will come and <a href='#FN1317'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fight against you </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_32">32&#160;</span>So Athenobius <a href='#FN1318'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the king’s friend came to Jerusalem: and when he saw the glory of Simon, and the cupboard of gold and silver plate, and his great <a href='#FN1319'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>attendance, he was astonished, and told him the king’s message. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_33">33&#160;</span>Then answered Simon, and said unto him, We have neither taken other men’s land, nor holden that which appertaineth to others, but the inheritance of our fathers, which our enemies had wrongfully in possession a certain time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_34">34&#160;</span>Wherefore we, having opportunity, hold the inheritance of our fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_35">35&#160;</span>And whereas thou demandest <a href='#FN1320'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Joppa and <a href='#FN1321'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Gazera, albeit they did great harm unto the people in our country, yet will we give <a href='#FN1322'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>thee an hundred talents for them. Hereunto Athenobius answered him not a word; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_36">36&#160;</span>But returned in a rage to the king, and made report unto him of these speeches, and of the glory of Simon, and of all that he had seen: whereupon the king was exceeding wroth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_37">37&#160;</span>In the mean time fled <a href='#FN1323'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Tryphon by ship unto Orthosias. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_38">38&#160;</span>Then the king made <a href='#FN1324'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Cendebeus captain of the sea coast, and gave him an host of footmen and horsemen, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_39">39&#160;</span>And commanded him to remove his host toward Judea; also he commanded him to build up <a href='#FN1325'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Cedron, and to fortify the gates, and to war against the people; but as for the king himself, he pursued <a href='#FN1326'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Tryphon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_40">40&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN1327'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Cendebeus came to <a href='#FN1328'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Jamnia and began to provoke the people and to invade Judea, and to take the people prisoners, and slay them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M115_41">41&#160;</span>And when he had built up Cedrou, he set horsemen there, and an host of footmen, to the end that issuing out they might make outroads upon the ways of Judea, as the king had commanded him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='M116_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_1">1&#160;</span>Then came up <a href='#FN1329'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>John from <a href='#FN1330'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a><a href='#FN1331'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Gazera, and told Simon his father <a href='#FN1332'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>what Cendebeus had done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_2">2&#160;</span>Wherefore Simon called his two eldest sons, Judas and <a href='#FN1333'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>John, and said unto them, <a href='#FN1334'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>I, and my brethren, and my father’s house, have ever from my youth unto this day fought against the enemies of Israel; and <a href='#FN1335'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>things have prospered so well in our hands, that we have delivered Israel oftentimes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_3">3&#160;</span>But now I am old, and ye, by God’s mercy, are of a sufficient age: be ye instead of me and <a href='#FN1336'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>my brother, and go and fight for our nation, and the help from heaven be with you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_4">4&#160;</span>So he chose out of the country twenty thousand men of war with horsemen, who went out against Cendebeus, and <a href='#FN1337'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>rested that night at <a href='#FN1338'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Modin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_5">5&#160;</span>And when as they rose in the morning, and went into the plain, behold, a mighty great host both of footmen and horsemen came against them: howbeit there was a water brook betwixt them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_6">6&#160;</span>So he and his people pitched over against them: and when he saw that the people were afraid to go over the water brook, he went first over himself, and then the men seeing him passed through after him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_7">7&#160;</span>That done, he divided his men, and set the horsemen in the midst of the footmen: for the enemies’ horsemen were very many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_8">8&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN1339'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>sounded they with the holy trumpets: whereupon Cendebeus and his host were put to flight, so that <a href='#FN1340'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>many of them were slain, and the remnant gat them to <a href='#FN1341'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the strong hold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_9">9&#160;</span>At that time was <a href='#FN1342'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Judas John’s brother wounded; but John still followed after them, until he came to <a href='#FN1343'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Cedron, which Cendebeus had built. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>So they fled even unto the towers in the fields of <a href='#FN1345'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1346'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Azotus; wherefore he burned it with fire: so that there were slain of them about two thousand men. Afterward he returned into the land of Judea in peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_11">11&#160;</span>Moreover in <a href='#FN1347'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the plain of Jericho was Ptolemeus the son of Abubus made captain, and he had abundance of silver and gold: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_12">12&#160;</span>For he was the high priest’s son in law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_13">13&#160;</span>Wherefore his heart being lifted up, he thought to get the country to himself, and thereupon consulted deceitfully against Simon and his sons to destroy them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_14">14&#160;</span>Now Simon was visiting the cities that were in the country, and taking care for the good ordering of them; at which time he came down himself to <a href='#FN1348'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Jericho with his sons, Mattathias and Judas, in <a href='#FN1349'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hundred threescore and seventeenth year, in the eleventh month, called <a href='#FN1350'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Sabat: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_15">15&#160;</span>Where the son of Abubus receiving them deceitfully into a little hold, called Docus, which he had built, made them a great banquet: howbeit he had hid men there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_16">16&#160;</span>So when Simon and his sons <a href='#FN1351'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>had drunk largely, Ptolemee and his men rose up, and took their weapons, and came upon Simon into the banqueting place, and slew him, and his two sons, and certain of his servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_17">17&#160;</span>In which doing he committed a great treachery, and recompensed evil for good. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_18">18&#160;</span>Then Ptolemee wrote these things, and sent to <a href='#FN1352'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the king, that he should send him an host to aid him, and he would deliver him the country and cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_19">19&#160;</span>He sent others also to <a href='#FN1353'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Gazera to kill John: and unto the <a href='#FN1354'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tribunes he sent letters to come unto him, that he might give them <a href='#FN1355'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>silver, and gold, and rewards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_20">20&#160;</span>And others he sent to take Jerusalem, and the mountain of the temple. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_21">21&#160;</span>Now one had run afore to <a href='#FN1356'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Gazera and told John that his father and brethren were slain, and, <a href='#FN1357'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>quoth he, Ptolemee hath sent to slay thee also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_22">22&#160;</span>Hereof when he heard, he was sore astonished: so he laid hands on them that were come to destroy him, and slew them; for he knew that they sought to make him away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>As concerning the rest of the acts of John, and his wars, and worthy deeds which he did, and the building of the walls which he made, and his doings, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="M116_24">24&#160;</span>Behold, these are written in the chronicles of his priesthood, from the time he was made high priest after his father. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_1'>Josh. 1. 1</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_1'>Baruch 1. 1</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_19'>2 Macc 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Chethiim</span>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN10_4'>Gen. 10. 4</a> (Heb.). <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU24_24'>Num. 24. 24</a>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_7'>1 Chr. 1. 7</a> (Heb.). <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS23_1'>Isai. 23. 1</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS23_12'>12</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_10'>Jer. 2. 10</a>. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_6'>Ezek. 27. 6</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_30'>Dan. 11. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C210_4'>2 Cor. 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>his heart was exalted and lifted up</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>kingdoms which became, &amp;c.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_22'>Rev. 2. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>that he dieth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_29'>2 Macc. 9. 29</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_1'>Acts 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 323.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_9"><span class="notemark">ff</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_15'>ch. 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_18'>Deut 29. 18</a>. with <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_10'>Isai. 11. 10</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_22'>2 Esdr. 3. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_53'>8. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_7'>2 Macc. 4. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_9'>10. 9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_13'>13</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_27'>ch. 3. 27</a>, &amp;c. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_14'>2 Macc. 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 176.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_7'>ch. 8. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_53'>9. 53</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_6'>10. 6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_9'>9</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_62'>11. 62</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_16'>13. 16</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 175.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[Began B.C. 312].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 174.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_11"><span class="notemark">ii</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ver. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_21'>11. 21</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_14'>10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>many evils have found us</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_13'>ch. 6. 13</a>. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_34'>Gen. 44. 34</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_13"><span class="notemark">ii</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ver. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_21'>11. 21</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_14'>10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_14"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_9'>2 Macc. 4. 9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>set up an open school at Jerusalem</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_18'>1 Cor. 7. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_14'>2 Cor. 6. 14</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_3'>Deut. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K121_20'>1 Kin. 21. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 170.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_25'>Dan. 11. 25</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_1'>2 Macc. 5. 1</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_34'>ch. 3. 34</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_30'>6. 30</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_34'>34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_35'>35</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_46'>46</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_6'>8. 6</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_4'>2 Macc. 11. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_2'>13. 2</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_15'>15</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_12'>14. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_56'>ch. 11. 56</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_20'>20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_21'>21</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_20'>2 Macc. 15. 20</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_17"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_9'>2 Macc. 12. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_21'>2 Macc. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_29'>9. 29</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_13'>10. 13</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG12_1'>Esth. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_11'>ch. 3. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_10'>8. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_17'>9. 17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_40'>40</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_8'>16. 8</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">B. C. 170 [–169].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_20"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_11'>2 Macc. 5. 11–16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN8_12'>Dan. 8. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_31'>11. 31</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_15'>2 Macc. 5. 15</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_16'>16</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_21'>21</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_12'>ch. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_21"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_1'>Ex. 30. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_21"><span class="notemark">w</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>Ex. 25. 31–39</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_22'>2 Esdr. 10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_21"><span class="notemark">w</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>Ex. 25. 31–39</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_22'>2 Esdr. 10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_23'>Ex. 25. 23–30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E12_13'>1 Esdr. 2. 13</a> (Gk.). So <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_9'>Ezra 1. 9–11</a>. &amp; <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER8_27'>8. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E12_13'>1 Esdr. 2. 13</a> (Gk.). So <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_9'>Ezra 1. 9–11</a>. &amp; <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER8_27'>8. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E12_13'>1 Esdr. 2. 13</a> (Gk.). So <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_9'>Ezra 1. 9–11</a>. &amp; <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER8_27'>8. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_31'>Ex. 26. 31–33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC6_11'>Zech. 6. 11</a>, <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC6_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>he</span> <span class="notemark">b</span> <span class='add'>pilled all</span> things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>desirable</span>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_8'>Dan. 11. 8</a>. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS13_15'>Hos. 13. 15</a>. <a href='NAM.xhtml#NM2_9'>Nah. 2. 9</a>. See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER8_27'>Ezra 8. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_24"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_12'>2 Macc. 5. 12–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_17'>2 Macc. 5. 17</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_21'>21</a>. Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_36'>Dan. 11. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_27"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_16'>Joel 2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 168.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_29"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR28_3'>Jer 28. 3</a> &amp; marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_29"><span class="notemark">ff</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_24'>2 Macc. 5. 24–26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_33"><span class="notemark">gg</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ch. 3. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_2'>4. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_41'>41</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_18'>6. 18</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_24'>24</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_26'>26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_32'>32</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_52'>9. 52</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_53'>53</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_6'>10. 6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_7'>7</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_9'>9</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_32'>32</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_20'>11. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_21'>21</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_22'>22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_41'>41</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_36'>12. 36</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_21'>13. 21</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_49'>49</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_50'>50</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_52'>52</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>14. 7</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_36'>36</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_28'>15. 28</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_31'>2 Macc. 15. 31</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_35'>35</a> in the Gk. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_12'>2 Macc. 4. 12</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_27'>27</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_5'>5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_34"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL2_15'>Gal. 2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_34"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ver. 11</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_44'>ch. 2. 44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_48'>48</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_5'>3. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_8'>8</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_36"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_40'>ch. 9. 40</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_51'>ch. 13. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_37"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_1'>Ps 79. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_38"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ch. 3. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>4. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_38"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 1.38</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_2'>2 Macc. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_39"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ch. 3. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>4. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_39"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB2_6'>Tobit 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_39"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_45'>ver. 45</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_34'>ch. 2. 34</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_6'>2 Macc. 6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_39"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_45'>ver. 45</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_34'>ch. 2. 34</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_6'>2 Macc. 6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_42"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.42</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_18'>ch. 2. 18</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_10'>2 Macc. 4. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_43"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.43</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_19'>ch. 2. 19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the laws</span> and rites <span class='add'>of the strangers of the land</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_45"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_31'>Dan. 11. 31</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_2'>2 Macc. 6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_45"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_45'>ver. 45</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_34'>ch. 2. 34</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_6'>2 Macc. 6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_46"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_31'>Dan. 11. 31</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_2'>2 Macc. 6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_47"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>ver. 54</a> (Gk.). So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_5'>2 Macc. 6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_47"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_2'>2 Macc. 10. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_3'>11. 3</a> in the Gk. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_13'>Ex. 34. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_47"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_83'>ch. 10. 83</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E12_10'>1 Esdr. 2. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM7_13'>Amos 7. 13</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_47"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.47</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_3'>Isai. 66. 3</a>. See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_18'>2 Macc. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_47"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_62'>ver. 62</a>. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC10_14'>Acts 10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_50"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_9'>2 Macc. 6. 9</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_12'>ch. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_50"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_21'>ch. 16. 21</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_24'>2 Macc. 6. 24</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_14'>11. 14</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_4'>Ex. 18. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_51"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_8'>2 Macc. 6. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_51"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.51</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_22'>2 Macc. 5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>and they made Israel</span> hide themselves <span class='add'>in holes, in every place of succour</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_53"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_31'>ch. 2. 31</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_36'>36</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_41'>41</a>. See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_11'>2 Macc. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_54"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_52'>ch. 4. 52</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_59'>59</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_9'>2 Macc. 1. 9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_18'>18</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_5'>10. 5</a>. See <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_1'>Neh. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.54</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 168 [–167].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_54"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_52'>ch. 4. 52</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_59'>59</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_9'>2 Macc. 1. 9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_18'>18</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_5'>10. 5</a>. See <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_1'>Neh. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_54"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_47'>ver. 47</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_57"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_32'>Rom. 1. 32</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>the king’s commandment put him to death</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_59"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>ver. 54</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>ch. 4. 38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_44'>44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_45'>45</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_52'>52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_59"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>ver. 54</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>ch. 4. 38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_44'>44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_45'>45</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_52'>52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_60"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_10'>2 Macc. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_60"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.60</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>that had circumcised their children</span>. Gk. as <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_10'>2 Macc. 6. 10</a>. But comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_61'>ver. 61</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_61"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_10'>2 Macc. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_62"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.62</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 167.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_62"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_63"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_19'>2 Macc. 6. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M11_63"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_19'>2 Macc. 6. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Mattathias</span> the son <span class='add'>of John, &amp;c. arose from Jerusalem</span>, or, <span class='add'>out of Jerusalem</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_65'>ver. 65</a>(Gk.). See <a href='2PE.xhtml#P21_1'>2 Pet. 1. 1</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_7'>1 Chr. 24. 7</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_29'>ch. 14. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_15'>ver. 15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_23'>23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_70'>70</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ch. 9. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_25'>13. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_30'>30</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_4'>16. 4</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_14'>2 Macc. 13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_35'>ch. 9. 35</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_36'>36</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_38'>38</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_22'>2 Macc. 8. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_19'>10. 19</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>who was called:</span> and so afterward in the rest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>Gaddis</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_66'>ver. 66</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_20'>ch. 8. 20</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_27'>2 Macc. 5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_5"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_23'>2 Macc. 8. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Avaron</span>, or, <span class='add'>Abaron:</span> Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_43'>ch. 6. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_2'>ver. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_3'>Wisd. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS5_0'>Song 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_31'>ch. 10. 31</a>. See <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH11_1'>Neh. 11. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_12'>2 Macc. 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_40'>ch. 1. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_23'>ch. 1. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_13'>2 Macc. 5. 13</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_24'>ch. 1. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_13'>Tobit 14. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_39'>Ezek. 16. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>holy</span> thing. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_39'>ch. 10. 39</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_51'>ch. 3. 51</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_59'>59</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_2'>Heb. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_2'>Ps. 50. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_21'>ch. 1. 21</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_47'>ch. 3. 47</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_71'>11. 71</a>. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_13'>Gen. 44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_47'>ch. 3. 47</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_71'>11. 71</a>. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_13'>Gen. 44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_31'>1 Kin. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_17'>ver. 17</a>. Gk. as <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_33'>Susanna 33</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_21'>Mark 3. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_21'>Acts 21. 21</a>. <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_3'>2 Thess. 2. 3</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_15"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_15'>ver. 15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_23'>23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_70'>70</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ch. 9. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_25'>13. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_30'>30</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_4'>16. 4</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_14'>2 Macc. 13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_17'>ver. 17</a>. Gk. as <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_33'>Susanna 33</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_21'>Mark 3. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_17"><span class="notemark">v</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_43'>ver. 43</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS127_5'>Ps. 127. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_18"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_41'>ch. 1. 41</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_42'>42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E19_51'>1 Esdr. 9. 51</a>, <a href='1ES.xhtml#E19_54'>54</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_2'>2 Macc. 3. 2</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_2'>ch. 7. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_19"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_21'>Acts 21. 21</a>. <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_3'>2 Thess. 2. 3</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_19"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_22'>ver. 22</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_45'>ch. 1. 45</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_4'>Rom. 9. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_20"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_15'>Josh. 24. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_21"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_22'>Matt. 16. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_22"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC5_29'>Acts 5. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_22"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_22"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_32'>Deut. 5. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_23"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_24"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_21'>Ps. 73. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_24"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_6'>Deut. 13. 6–9</a>. Or as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_26"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_7'>Num. 25. 7</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_8'>8</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_14'>14</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_28"><span class="notemark">j</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_27'>2 Macc. 5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_29"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS16_5'>Isai. 16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_29"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_6'>Deut. 13. 6–9</a>. Or as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_29"><span class="notemark">j</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_27'>2 Macc. 5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>sit</span>, [or,] <span class='add'>abide</span>. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC18_11'>Acts 18. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_30"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>evils were multiplied upon them</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_31"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_31"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_59'>ch. 6. 59</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_31"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_36'>ver. 36</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_41'>41</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_53'>ch. 1. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_34"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_39'>ch. 1. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.35</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>the Jews</span>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_36"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_36'>ver. 36</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_41'>41</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_53'>ch. 1. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>simplicity</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_60'>ver. 60</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_1'>Wisd. 1. 1</a>. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_5'>Eph. 6. 5</a> (Gk.). <a href='COL.xhtml#CL3_22'>Col. 3. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_38"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_11'>2 Macc. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_38"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>souls of men</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>. See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_21'>1 Chr. 5. 21</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_41"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_43'>ch. 9. 43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_44'>44</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_1'>2 Macc. 15. 1–4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_41"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_41"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_36'>ver. 36</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_41'>41</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_53'>ch. 1. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_42"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_13'>ch. 7. 13</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_6'>2 Macc. 14. 6</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_5'>Ps. 50. 5</a> (Heb.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_43"><span class="notemark">v</span> 2.43</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_17'>ver. 17</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_44"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_44"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_5'>ch. 3. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>by force</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_46"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_2'>Rev. 18. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>gave they the horn to the sinner</span>. Comp. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_1'>1 Sam. 2. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_5'>Ecclus. 47. 5</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_48"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.48</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>generations</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_52"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_9'>Gen. 22. 9–12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_52"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_6'>Gen. 15. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_53"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN39_8'>Gen. 39. 8</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN39_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_53"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_9'>Rom. 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_53"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_40'>Gen. 41. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_54"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ver. 1</a> with <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_4'>1 Chr. 24. 4</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_54"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_13'>Numb. 25. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_23'>Ecclus. 45. 23</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_24'>24</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_54"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_55"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_2'>Josh. 1. 2</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_7'>Ecclus. 46. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_56"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_6'>Numb. 14. 6</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_7'>7</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_24'>24</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_6'>Josh. 14. 6–13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_7'>Ecclus. 46. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_56"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_38'>Acts 7. 38</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_57"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_4'>Hos. 6. 4</a> marg., or comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S22_4'>2 Sam. 2. 4–6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_57"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.57</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_16'>2 Sam. 7. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_58"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.58</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K22_11'>2 Kin. 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_58"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_59"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN1_6'>Dan. 1. 6</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN1_7'>7</a>. &amp; <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN3_16'>3. 16–18</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN3_26'>26</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_66'>Song 66</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_60"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_22'>Dan. 6. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_60"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_62"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.62</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_12'>Isai. 51. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_62"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.62</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_10'>Ecclus. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_62"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.62</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_23'>2 Esdr. 16. 23</a>. See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_37'>2 Kin. 9. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_63"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.63</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_10'>Ecclus. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_63"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_63"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS146_4'>Ps. 146. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_63"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS146_4'>Ps. 146. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_64"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.64</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S210_12'>2 Sam. 10. 12</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C116_13'>1 Cor. 16. 13</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_65"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.65</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_3'>ver. 3</a> (Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ver. 1</a>). <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_17'>ch. 5. 17</a>, &amp;c. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_1'>ch. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_66"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.66</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_4'>ver. 4</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_27'>2 Macc. 5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_66"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.66</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_18'>Ecclus. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_66"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.66</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fight ye the battle of the people</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_67"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.67</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_13'>Rom. 2. 13</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_11'>James 4. 11</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_69"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.69</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_28'>Gen. 49. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_69"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.69</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_1'>Bel and Drag. 1</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_30'>ch. 14. 30</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_22'>Judith 16. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_70"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.70</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 166.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_70"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.70</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M12_70"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.70</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_39'>ch. 4. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_9'>ver. 9</a>, comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_1'>2 Macc. 8. 1–7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_1"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_14'>ch. 13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_5'>1 Sam. 17. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_41'>ch. 6. 41</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_43'>43</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_38'>6. 38</a> (Engl.). See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_11'>1 Kin. 20. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_44'>ch. 2. 44</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_5"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_36'>2 Macc. 10. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_44'>ch. 2. 44</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_12'>2 Macc. 6. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_6"><span class="notemark">ff</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_23'>ch. 9. 23</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS94_4'>Ps. 94. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_36'>ch. 14. 36</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_2'>16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_7"><span class="notemark">gg</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>Ecclus. 45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_44'>ch. 2. 44</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_11'>Num. 25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>gathered together</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_13'>Job 29. 13</a> &amp; Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_21'>2 Macc. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_24'>5. 24</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_66'>ch. 5. 66</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_30'>10. 30</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_38'>38</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_1'>2 Macc. 15. 1</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_24'>1 Kin. 16. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>ch. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_21'>2 Macc. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_24'>5. 24</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_2'>Tobit 14. 2</a> marg. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_72'>72</a> marg. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_88'>10. 88</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_11'>Luke 19. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_15"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_15"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_44'>ch. 2. 44</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_24'>ver. 24</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_4'>Judith 4. 4</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_39'>ch. 7. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>9. 50</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_10'>Josh. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_17"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_32'>Matt. 15. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_6'>1 Sam. 14. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_31'>ch. 4. 31</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_46'>1 Sam. 17. 46</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_55'>ch. 4. 55</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_60'>ver. 60</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_8'>Judith 5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_6'>1 Sam. 14. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>unto us</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in multitude of pride</span>, or, <span class='add'>envy and iniquity</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_23"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in the going down</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_11'>Josh. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_25"><span class="notemark">w</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_6'>1 Pet. 3. 6</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_25'>Deut. 2. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_26"><span class="notemark">x</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_41'>ch. 12. 41</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_20'>2 Macc. 8. 20</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_23'>Judith 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_27"><span class="notemark">y</span> 3.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_27"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 3.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_56'>1 Esdr. 4. 56</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_32'>ch. 14. 32</a> in the Gk. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_14'>Luke 3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>at every need</span>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ch. 13. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. that <span class='add'>the collectors of tribute in the country</span> were <span class='add'>few</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>for the taking away of the laws</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>that he should not have</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_30"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_11'>Ps. 62. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_30"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_24'>Dan. 11. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_31"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_7'>Ecclus. 18. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_31"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_1'>ch. 6. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_56'>56</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_2'>14. 2</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_13'>2 Macc. 1. 13</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_19'>19</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_32"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_17'>ch. 6. 17</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_11'>2 Macc. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_32"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 3.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_1'>2 Macc. 11. 1</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_35'>35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_33"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_10'>2 Macc. 10. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_25'>2 Macc. 9. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_34"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_35"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_35"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_53'>ch. 12. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_37"><span class="notemark">j</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_35'>ch. 4. 35</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_63'>6. 63</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_68'>10. 68</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_13'>11. 13</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_44'>44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_56'>56</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_9'>2 Macc. 4. (9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_19'>19)</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_33'>33</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_21'>5. 21</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_35'>8. 35</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_36'>11. 36</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_23'>13. 23</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_26'>26</a>. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC11_26'>Acts 11. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>a city of his kingdom</span>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_2'>Josh. 10. 2</a> marg. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S127_5'>1 Sam. 27. 5</a> (Heb.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 166–5].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_37"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_1'>ch. 6. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_56'>56</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_2'>14. 2</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_13'>2 Macc. 1. 13</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_19'>19</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_37"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_1'>ch. 6. 1</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_25'>2 Macc. 9. 25</a>. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_23'>2 Macc. 9. 23</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC19_1'>Acts 19. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_38"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_45'>2 Macc. 4. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_38"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_26'>ch. 7. 26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_27'>27</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_31'>31</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_32'>32</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_33'>33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_44'>44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_47'>47</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_9'>2 Macc. 8. 9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_34'>34</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_3'>9. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>12. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_12'>14. 12</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_38"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_18'>18</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_59'>5. 59</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_9'>2 Macc. 8. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_14'>10. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_32'>12. 32</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_35'>35</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_36'>36</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_37'>37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_38"><span class="notemark">nn</span> 3.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_40"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_57'>ver. 57</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_3'>ch. 4. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>9. 50</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK24_13'>Luke 24. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_41"><span class="notemark">oo</span> 3.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_10'>2 Macc. 8. 10</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_11'>11</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_25'>25</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fetters</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_41"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of strangers</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_22'>ch. 4. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_66'>5. 66</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_68'>68</a>. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_1'>1 Sam. 14. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_1'>17. 1</a>, &amp;c. (Gk.). So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_30'>ch. 4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_42"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_12'>2 Macc. 8. 12</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_43"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C210_4'>2 Cor. 10. 4</a>, <a href='2CO.xhtml#C210_8'>8</a>. &amp; <a href='2CO.xhtml#C213_10'>13. 10</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_45"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_45"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_38'>ch. 1. 38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_39'>39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>4. 38</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_2'>2 Macc. 8. 2</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_45"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>ch. 15. 25</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_49'>ch. 13. 49</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_14'>15. 14</a>. See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_17'>Num. 27. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_45"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_38'>ch. 1. 38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_39'>39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>4. 38</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_2'>2 Macc. 8. 2</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_45"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_45"><span class="notemark">w</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_15'>Ecclus. 39. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Mitzpa</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_46"><span class="notemark">x</span> 3.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG20_1'>Judg. 20. 1</a>. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_5'>1 Sam. 7. 5</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS18_26'>Josh. 18. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_47"><span class="notemark">y</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_1'>Esther 4. 1</a>, <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_47"><span class="notemark">z</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_14'>ch. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_47"><span class="notemark">y</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_1'>Esther 4. 1</a>, <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_47"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_39'>ch. 4. 39</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_71'>ch. 11. 71</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_25'>2 Macc. 10. 25</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_15'>14. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_47"><span class="notemark">z</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_14'>ch. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_47"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_39'>ch. 4. 39</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_71'>ch. 11. 71</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_25'>2 Macc. 10. 25</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_15'>14. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>for the which the heathen had made diligent search, that</span> they <span class='add'>might paint therein the likeness of their idols</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_48"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_1'>Lev. 26. 1</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_52'>Num. 33. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_49"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.49</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_10'>Ecclus. 45. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_49"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_8'>Ecclus. 35. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_49"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_9'>Ecclus. 35. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_49"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_2'>Numb. 6. 2</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_13'>13</a>. Comp. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM2_11'>Amos 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_49"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_26'>Acts 21. 26</a>, <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_51"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.51</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_54"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_8'>Num. 10. 8</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_9'>9</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_13'>ch. 4. 13</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_40'>40</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_45'>7. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_8'>16. 8</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_16'>Ecclus. 50. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_55"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.55</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_22'>2 Macc. 8. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_55"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_18'>1 Sam. 17. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_56"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT20_5'>Deut. 20. 5–8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_56"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_3'>Judg. 7. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_13'>2 Macc. 8. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_56"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.56</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_14'>Wisd. 9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_56"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT20_5'>Deut. 20. 5–8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_57"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_57"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_58"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S210_12'>2 Sam. 10. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_14'>Eph. 6. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_58"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.58</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_59"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_60"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S210_12'>2 Sam. 10. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_14'>Eph. 6. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M13_60"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.60</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_10'>ch. 4. 10</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_40'>40</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_55'>55</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_46'>9. 46</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_11'>2 Macc. 7. 11</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_34'>34</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_4'>9. 4</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_34'>15. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_5'>ver. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_18'>18</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_39'>ch. 3. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_40'>ch. 3. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_5"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_5'>ver. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_18'>18</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>targets</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_2'>ch. 6. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_38'>ch. 6. 38</a> (Engl.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_3'>ch. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_8"><span class="notemark">ff</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_16'>2 Macc. 8. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_8"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_39'>ch. 3. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_30'>Ex. 14. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_40'>ver. 40</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_60'>ch. 3. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_10"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_46'>1 Sam. 17. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_23'>2 Macc. 8. 23–26</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_13"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_54'>ch. 3. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">[Gr. <span class='add'>Assaremoth</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_45'>ch. 7. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_52'>9. 52</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>13. 53</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>14. 7</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_34'>34</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_28'>15. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_35'>35</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_1'>16. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_19'>19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_21'>21</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_33'>Josh. 10. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ver. 29</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_61'>61</a>. See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_8'>Mark 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_28'>Judith 2. 28</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_68'>ch. 5. 68</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_15'>9. 15</a>? &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_77'>10. 77</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_78'>78</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_83'>83</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_84'>84</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_4'>11. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_34'>14. 34</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_10'>16. 10</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S15_1'>1 Sam. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_11'>Josh. 15. 11</a>? <a href='2CH.xhtml#R226_6'>2 Chr. 26. 6</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_28'>Judith 2. 28</a>? <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_58'>ch. 5. 58</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_69'>10. 69</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_40'>15. 40</a>. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_8'>2 Macc. 12. 8</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_9'>9</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_40'>40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_18"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_5'>ver. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_18'>18</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_20"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_21"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_41'>ch. 3. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_27'>2 Macc. 8. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_10'>Ecclus. 45. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_24"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_27'>2 Macc. 8. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_24"><span class="notemark">t</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS136_1'>Ps. 136. 1</a>. So <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_67'>Song 67</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>he</span>]. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_1'>Ps. 106. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_26"><span class="notemark">u</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_27"><span class="notemark">v</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_6'>Acts 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_27"><span class="notemark">w</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_8'>ch. 6. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.28</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 165.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_28"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_39'>ch. 3. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_29"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ver. 29</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_61'>61</a>. See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_8'>Mark 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_29"><span class="notemark">x</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_61'>ver. 61</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_7'>ch. 6. 7</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_26'>26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_31'>31</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_52'>9. 52</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_14'>10. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_65'>11. 65</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>14. 7</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_33'>33</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_5'>2 Macc. 11. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_19'>13. 19</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_22'>22</a>. See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R211_7'>2 Chr. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_29"><span class="notemark">y</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_30"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ch. 5. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_30"><span class="notemark">z</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_50'>1 Sam. 17. 50</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_51'>51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Philistines</span>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_22'>ver. 22</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_41'>ch. 3. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_30"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_13'>1 Sam. 14. 13</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_31"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_18'>ch. 3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>melt</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_29'>Wisd. 16. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_35"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_37'>ch. 3. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>repair</span>. Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_54'>ver. 54</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_57'>57</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_44'>10. 44</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_10'>ch. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_37"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_1'>2 Macc. 10. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_38"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_1'>2 Macc. 10. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_38"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_39'>ch. 1. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>3. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_38"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_59'>ch. 1. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_38"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_48'>ver. 48</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R24_9'>2 Chr. 4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_38"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_48'>ver. 48</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R24_9'>2 Chr. 4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_38"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_57'>ver. 57</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR35_4'>Jer. 35. 4</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1KI.xhtml#K16_5'>1 Kin. 6. 5</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K16_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_39"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_47'>ch. 3. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_39"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_70'>ch. 2. 70</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_39"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_47'>ch. 3. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_40"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_45'>ch. 7. 45</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_54'>ch. 3. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_40"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_41"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_44"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_59'>ch. 1. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_45"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_59'>ch. 1. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_46"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_27'>ch. 9. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_41'>14. 41</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_9'>Ps. 74. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_63'>Ezra 2. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_47"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_5'>Deut. 27. 5</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_6'>6</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS8_31'>Josh. 8. 31</a> in the Gk. So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_25'>Ex. 20. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_47"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_3'>2 Macc. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_48"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.48</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_48'>ver. 48</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R24_9'>2 Chr. 4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_49"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>Ex. 25. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_49"><span class="notemark">s</span> 4.49</a>
 <span class="ft">But comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_49"><span class="notemark">t</span> 4.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_1'>Ex. 30. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_49"><span class="notemark">u</span> 4.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_23'>Ex. 25. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_50"><span class="notemark">w</span> 4.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_7'>Ex. 30. 7</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_8'>8</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_8'>2 Macc. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_50"><span class="notemark">x</span> 4.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_3'>2 Macc. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_50"><span class="notemark">w</span> 4.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_7'>Ex. 30. 7</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_8'>8</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_8'>2 Macc. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_51"><span class="notemark">y</span> 4.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_30'>Ex. 25. 30</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_8'>2 Macc. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>spread abroad the hangings</span>, or, <span class='add'>hanged up the vails</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_51"><span class="notemark">z</span> 4.51</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_31'>Ex. 26. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_52"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_59'>ch. 1. 59</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_3'>2 Macc. 10. 3</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_52"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>ch. 1. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_52"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.52</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 165–4].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_53"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_38'>Ex. 29. 38</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_39'>39</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_8'>2 Macc. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_53"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_54"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_59'>ch. 1. 59</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_3'>2 Macc. 10. 3</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_54"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.54</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_15'>Ecclus. 39. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_54"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_51'>ch. 13. 51</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_2'>Judith 16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_55"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.55</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_8'>Judith 5. 8</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_18'>ch. 3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_56"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_6'>2 Macc. 10. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_56"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.56</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>peace offerings</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_1'>Ecclus. 35. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_56"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_2'>Ecclus. 35. 2</a>. See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R229_31'>2 Chr. 29. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_57"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_57"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>dedicated</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_36'>ver. 36</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_54'>54</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>made doors for them</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_59"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.59</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_18'>2 Macc. 1. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_16'>2. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_8'>10. 8</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_22'>John 10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_59"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_52'>ver. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_59"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>ch. 1. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_60"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_7'>ch. 6. 7</a>?, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_60"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_31'>ch. 1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_61"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.61</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M14_61"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.61</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 164.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_47'>ch. 4. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_36'>ch. 4. 36</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_54'>54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_65'>ver. 65</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_8'>Judith 7. 8</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_15'>2 Macc. 10. 15–17</a>. See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_8'>Mark 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Arabathane</span>, or, <span class='add'>Arabattan</span>, or, <span class='add'>Akrabattine</span>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_3'>Josh. 15. 3</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>malice</span>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C15_8'>1 Cor. 5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Akan</span>. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN36_27'>Gen. 36. 27</a>. See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_31'>Numb. 33. 31</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_32'>32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_22'>Ps. 69. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_22'>Ps. 69. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_2'>Num. 21. 2</a> (Gk.). &amp;c. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_5'>ch 3. 5</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_36'>2 Macc. 10. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_26'>2 Macc. 4. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_7'>5. 7</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>Judith 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_6"><span class="notemark">gg</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_32'>Num. 21. 32</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_32'>2 Macc. 10. 32</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_65'>ver. 65</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_47'>Gen. 31. 47</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_48'>48</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_1'>Num. 32. 1</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>15. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_27'>27</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_11"><span class="notemark">gg</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_13"><span class="notemark">kk</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_17'>2 Macc. 12. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>Tubin</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG11_3'>Judg. 11. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_11'>Judith 15. 11</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_37'>2 Kin. 18. 37</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_45'>ch. 13. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_55'>55</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ch. 10. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_39'>39</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_56'>56</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_60'>60</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_22'>11. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_24'>24</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_45'>12. 45</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_48'>48</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_12'>13. 12</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_24'>2 Macc. 13. 24</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_25'>25</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_7'>Acts 21. 7</a>. So <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG1_31'>Judg. 1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_55'>1 Esdr. 5. 55</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_11'>2 Esdr. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_1'>Isai. 9. 1</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_16'>Matt. 4. 16</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_3'>ch. 2. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_65'>65</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_1'>Isai. 9. 1</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_16'>Matt. 4. 16</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_5'>ch. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_17"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_47'>Gen. 31. 47</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_48'>48</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_1'>Num. 32. 1</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>15. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_27'>27</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_56'>ver. 56</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_60'>60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_19"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_57'>ver. 57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_61'>61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_20"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_36'>ver. 36</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_6'>Isai. 34. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_1'>63. 1</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_24'>Jer. 48. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_20"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_47'>Gen. 31. 47</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_48'>48</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_1'>Num. 32. 1</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>15. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_27'>27</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_22"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_55'>55</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ch. 10. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_39'>39</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_56'>56</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_60'>60</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_22'>11. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_24'>24</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_45'>12. 45</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_48'>48</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_12'>13. 12</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_24'>2 Macc. 13. 24</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_25'>25</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_7'>Acts 21. 7</a>. So <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG1_31'>Judg. 1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>captive Jews</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_23"><span class="notemark">v</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_24"><span class="notemark">w</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_25"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_35'>ch. 9. 35</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_31'>ch. 12. 31</a> marg. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_7'>Isai. 60. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_25"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_47'>Gen. 31. 47</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_48'>48</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_1'>Num. 32. 1</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>15. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_27'>27</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Bosorra</span>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_44'>1 Chr. 1. 44</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_26"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_36'>ver. 36</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_6'>Isai. 34. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_1'>63. 1</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_24'>Jer. 48. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Chascor</span>, [or, <span class='add'>Casphon</span>, as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_36'>ver. 36</a>]. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_13'>2 Macc. 12. 13</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_26"><span class="notemark">z</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_14'>Deut. 3. 14</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_5'>Josh. 12. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_11'>13. 11</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_13'>13</a>. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S210_6'>2 Sam. 10. 6</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_26"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN14_5'>Gen. 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_27"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_47'>Gen. 31. 47</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_48'>48</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_1'>Num. 32. 1</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>15. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_27'>27</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_2'>2 Macc. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>the heathen</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_28"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Bosor</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_28"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_51'>51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_28"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_51'>ver. 51</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_27'>Judith 2. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_29"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>lift up their eyes</span>. So <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_10'>Gen. 13. 10</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.30</a>
 <span class="ft">[That is,] <span class='add'>the heathen assaulted the Jews</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_23'>Ex. 2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_33"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_16'>Judg. 7. 16</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_17'>Job 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_34"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_35"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_49'>Gen. 31. 49</a>. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG11_29'>Judg. 11. 29</a>, <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG11_34'>34</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_35"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_51'>51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_36"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_36"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_39'>Matt. 15. 39</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_37"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_11'>11</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_20'>2 Macc. 12. 20</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_37"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_38"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_39"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_16'>ch. 11. 16</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_17'>17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_39'>39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_31'>12. 31</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_8'>2 Macc. 5. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_10'>12. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_40"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>ver. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_42"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.42</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_12'>ch. 7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_43"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_22'>2 Macc. 12. 22</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_43"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.43</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN14_5'>Gen. 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.44</a>
 <span class="ft">[That is,] <span class='add'>Judas and his company</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_44"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_21'>2 Macc. 12. 21</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_44"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.44</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN14_5'>Gen. 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_45"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_13'>Jer. 6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_45"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_45"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_8'>Ecclus. 43. 8</a> (Gk.). <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_11'>ver. 11</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_28'>28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_34'>34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_37'>37</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_38'>38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_49'>49</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_3'>ch. 3. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_17'>17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_23'>23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_27'>27</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_41'>41</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_57'>57</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>, &amp;c. in the Gk. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_7'>Judith 7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_46"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_27'>2 Macc. 12. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_46"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_61'>1 Esdr. 8. 61</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_46"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.46</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_27'>Deut. 2. 27</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_48"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.48</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_27'>Deut. 2. 27</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_49"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_8'>Ecclus. 43. 8</a> (Gk.). <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_11'>ver. 11</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_28'>28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_34'>34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_37'>37</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_38'>38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_49'>49</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_3'>ch. 3. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_17'>17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_23'>23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_27'>27</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_41'>41</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_57'>57</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>, &amp;c. in the Gk. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_7'>Judith 7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_50"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_28'>2 Macc. 12. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_51"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_51'>51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_51"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_51'>ver. 51</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_27'>Judith 2. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_52"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_52"><span class="notemark">z</span> 5.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_49'>ch. 12. 49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_52"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_40'>ch. 12. 40</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_41'>41</a>. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_29'>2 Macc. 12. 29</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_11'>Josh. 17. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>went hindmost</span>. So <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_25'>Num. 10. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>comforted</span>, or, <span class='add'>encouraged</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_23'>Ecclus. 30. 23</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_50'>ch. 12. 50</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C21_4'>2 Cor. 1. 4</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_24'>ch. 10. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>peace offerings</span>. Joseph. Antiq. [lib.] 12. [cap.] 12.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_54"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_35'>ch. 7. 35</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K122_27'>1 Kin. 22. 27</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_31'>2 Macc. 12. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_55"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_24'>ver. 24–54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_55"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_21'>ver. 21–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_55"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.55</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_56"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_57"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_58"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.58</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_32'>2 Macc. 12. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_59"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_59"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_32'>2 Macc. 12. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_59"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>to meet them in battle</span>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_39'>ver. 39</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_48'>ch. 6. 48</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_31'>7. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_11'>9. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_2'>10. 2</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_60"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_61"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_65"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.65</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_33'>2 Macc. 12. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_65"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.65</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_65"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.65</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS21_11'>Josh. 21. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_65"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.65</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>daughters</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_8'>ver. 8</a>. See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_25'>Num. 21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_66"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.66</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>strangers</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_68'>ver. 68</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_41'>ch. 3. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_66"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.66</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_10'>ch. 3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M15_68"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.68</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_31'>ch. 3. 31</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_37'>37</a>. To <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_4'>ver. 4</a>, comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_13'>2 Macc. 1. 13–16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_31'>ch. 3. 31</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_37'>37</a>. To <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_4'>ver. 4</a>, comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_13'>2 Macc. 1. 13–16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB2_10'>Tobit 2. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_1'>2 Macc. 9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_1"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_31'>ch. 3. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shields</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_6'>ch. 4. 6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>armour</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_12'>Rom. 13. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_2'>2 Macc. 9. 2</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_4"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_4'>ver. 4</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_28'>2 Macc. 9. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_5"><span class="notemark">dd</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_3'>2 Macc. 9. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>–<a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_35'>4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_14'>Gen. 26. 14</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB7_8'>Tobit 7. 8</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_36'>ch. 4. 36–59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_54'>ch. 1. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_60'>ch. 4. 60</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_61'>ch. 4. 61</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ch. 4. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_5'>2 Macc. 9. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_27'>ch. 4. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_11'>2 Macc. 9. 11–17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_35'>Luke 6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_21'>ch. 1. 21–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_50'>ch. 1. 50</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_57'>57</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a> marg. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_37'>2 Macc. 7. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_55'>ver. 55</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_63'>63</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_29'>2 Macc. 9. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_9'>ch. 1. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_14'>ch. 8. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_42'>Gen. 41. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he <span class='add'>should take his son Antiochus</span> to him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_16"><span class="notemark">v</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_9'>2 Macc. 10. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_16"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_4'>ver. 4</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_28'>2 Macc. 9. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 164. [Nisan]. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_21'>2 Macc. 11. 21</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_32'>ch. 3. 32</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_33'>33</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_55'>ver. 55</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_2'>7. 2</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_11'>2 Macc. 10. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_1'>11. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_1'>12. 1</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_27'>27</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_2'>13. 2</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_4'>4</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_26'>26</a>, &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_2'>14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_32'>ch. 3. 32</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_33'>33</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_55'>ver. 55</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_2'>7. 2</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_11'>2 Macc. 10. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_1'>11. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_1'>12. 1</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_27'>27</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_2'>13. 2</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_4'>4</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_26'>26</a>, &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_2'>14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_17"><span class="notemark">y</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_10'>2 Macc. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_18"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_24'>ver. 24</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 163. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_1'>2 Macc. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_20"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_51'>ver. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_21"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_24'>ver. 24</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_22"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_24"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_24'>ver. 24</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_22'>ch. 5. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_44'>44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_51'>51</a>? &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_26"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_61'>ch. 4. 61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_28"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_1'>2 Macc. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_29"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_38'>ch. 11. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_5'>14. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_1'>15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_2'>2 Macc. 13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_30"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_34'>ver. 34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_35'>35</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_46'>46</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_31"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_8'>Mark 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_31"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_19'>2 Macc. 13. 19–21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_32"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_33"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_33'>ver. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_34"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_34'>ver. 34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_35'>35</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_46'>46</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_34"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_26'>Ecclus. 39. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_35"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_34'>ver. 34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_35'>35</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_46'>46</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>stirring</span> them <span class='add'>up, and being compassed with the ranks</span>, or, <span class='add'>defended with the valleys</span>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_82'>ch. 10. 82</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_38"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_7'>ch. 4. 7</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_41"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_3'>ch. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_43"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_5'>ch. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_43"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.43</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_3'>ch. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_44"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_23'>ch. 11. 23</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_29'>14. 29</a> (Gk. &amp; Engl.). See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_23'>Luke 8. 23</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_44"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_23'>ch. 11. 23</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_29'>14. 29</a> (Gk. &amp; Engl.). See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_23'>Luke 8. 23</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_44"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_9'>Judith 11. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>so that he cut them in pieces</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_46"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_34'>ver. 34</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_35'>35</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_46'>46</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_47"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_33'>ver. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in Judea</span>. Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_53'>ver. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_49"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_22'>2 Macc. 13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_49"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Add out of Josephus, <span class='add'>and yielded themselves</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_49"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_53'>ver. 53</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_4'>Lev. 25. 4</a>, <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_5'>5</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_21'>2 Chr. 36. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>made there mounts for shot</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_20'>ver. 20</a>. So <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_24'>Jer. 32. 24</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR33_4'>33. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_52"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.52</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>the Jews</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_53"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_53'>ver. 53</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_4'>Lev. 25. 4</a>, <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_5'>5</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_21'>2 Chr. 36. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_53"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_52'>ch. 9. 52</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_55"><span class="notemark">y</span> 6.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_23'>2 Macc. 13. 23</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_17'>ver. 17</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_13'>2 Macc. 11. 13–15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_55"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.55</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_56"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_1'>ver. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_58"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.58</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>give hands</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_50'>ch. 11. 50</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_62'>62</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_45'>13. 45</a> (Gk.). <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_26'>2 Macc. 11. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_11'>12. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_22'>13. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_19'>14. 19</a>. See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K210_15'>2 Kin. 10. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_59"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_31'>ch. 2. 31</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_60"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.60</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_23'>2 Macc. 13. 23</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_60"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_21'>ch. 8. 21</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC6_5'>Acts 6. 5</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_62"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_36'>ch. 11. 36</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_44'>14. 44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_45'>45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_27'>15. 27</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_25'>2 Macc. 13. 25</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_28'>14. 28</a> (Gk.). See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_9'>Mark 7. 9</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_62"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_60'>ch. 4. 60</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_11'>ch. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_63"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M213_26'>2 Macc. 13. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_63"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.63</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_37'>ch. 3. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_63"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.63</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M16_63"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_29'>2 Macc. 9. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 162. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_4'>2 Macc. 14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_1'>2 Macc. 14. 1</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_26'>26</a>. See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_3'>2 Macc. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_1'>2 Macc. 14. 1</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_26'>26</a>. See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_3'>2 Macc. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_1"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class="notemark">a</span> <span class='add'>Tripolis</span>, Joseph. Ant. lib. 12. cap. 16.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>house of the kingdom of his father</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_19'>ch. 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_2'>2 Macc. 14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_21'>ch. 6. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_23'>9. 23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_69'>69</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_73'>73</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN625"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_21'>ch. 6. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_23'>9. 23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_69'>69</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_73'>73</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN626"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_3'>2 Macc. 14. 3</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_13'>13</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_26'>26</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_54'>54–56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN627"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_24'>ch. 6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN628"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_12'>ver. 12</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_19'>19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_26'>26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_43'>43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_68'>68</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_30'>2 Macc. 8. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN629"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN630"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_7'>Deut. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN631"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_12"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_12'>ver. 12</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_19'>19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_26'>26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_43'>43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_68'>68</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_30'>2 Macc. 8. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN632"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>officers, governors, chief men</span>, or, <span class='add'>men in authority</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_42'>ch. 5. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN633"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_42'>ch. 2. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN634"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_14"><span class="notemark">ii</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_7'>2 Macc. 14. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN635"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_16"><span class="notemark">j</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB2_6'>Heb. 2. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_3'>4. 3</a>, <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN636"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_17"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Cited from <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_2'>Ps. 79. 2</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN637"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>judgment</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_22'>ch. 6. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN638"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_19"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_12'>ver. 12</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_19'>19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_26'>26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_43'>43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_68'>68</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_30'>2 Macc. 8. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN639"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_24'>ver. 24</a>. (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN640"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_7'>Jer. 41. 7</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN641"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_20"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_12'>ver. 12</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_19'>19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_26'>26</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_43'>43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_68'>68</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_30'>2 Macc. 8. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN642"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>laboured to defend</span> his <span class='add'>high priesthood</span>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN643"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fled</span> from him <span class='add'>to the enemy</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_19'>ver. 19</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_24'>ch. 9. 24</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN644"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>invade the country</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN645"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>were grown very strong</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN646"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>to abide them</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN647"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_25"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_3'>2 Macc. 14. 3–10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN648"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_26"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_12'>2 Macc. 14. 12</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN649"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_26"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN650"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_27"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_38'>ver. 38</a>, comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_21'>2 Macc. 14. 21–36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN651"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 161.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN652"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>peaceable</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN653"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>see your faces</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_30'>ver. 30</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN654"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_31"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN655"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>meet Judas in battle</span>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_59'>ch. 5. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN656"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Carphasalama</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN657"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_32"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN658"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_33"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN659"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_33"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_60'>ch. 4. 60</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_48'>6. 48</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>62</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_51'>ch. 6. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN660"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_33"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_31'>2 Macc. 14. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN661"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_33"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.33</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_11'>Baruch 1. 11</a>. See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER6_10'>Ezra 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN662"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>defiled them</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN663"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in peace</span>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_54'>ch. 5. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN664"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_36"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_31'>2 Macc. 14. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN665"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_36"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.36</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_17'>Joel 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN666"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_37"><span class="notemark">x</span> 7.37</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_5'>Deut. 12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN667"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_37"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_7'>Isai. 56. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN668"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_39"><span class="notemark">z</span> 7.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_1'>2 Macc. 15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN669"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_39"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_16'>ch. 3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN670"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_40"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_40'>ver. 40</a>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R17_28'>1 Chr. 7. 28</a> marg. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_5'>ch. 9. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN671"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_40"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.40</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_50'>ver. 50</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_22'>2 Macc. 15. 22–37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN672"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_41"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_18'>Tobit 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN673"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_42"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN674"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_43"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.43</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER6_15'>Ezra 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN675"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_43"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_28'>2 Macc. 15. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN676"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>the Jews</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN677"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_45"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_40'>ver. 40</a>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R17_28'>1 Chr. 7. 28</a> marg. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_5'>ch. 9. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN678"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_45"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN679"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_45"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_40'>ch. 4. 40</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_54'>ch. 3. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN680"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_47"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_32'>2 Macc. 14. 32</a>. Comp. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_21'>2 Kin. 19. 21</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN681"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_47"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN682"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_47"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_30'>2 Macc. 15. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN683"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_49"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_36'>2 Macc. 15. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN684"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_49"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.49</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER6_15'>Ezra 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN685"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M17_50"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.50</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_57'>ch. 9. 57</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_4'>14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN686"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_1'>7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_1'>12. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>16</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_16'>14. 16</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>24</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_40'>40</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_15'>15. 15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_16'>16</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_11'>2 Macc. 4. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_10'>8. 10</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_36'>36</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN687"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>French men</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN688"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC16_6'>Acts 16. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_20'>2 Macc. 8. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN689"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>every place</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN690"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Macedonians</span>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN691"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_46'>2 Esdr. 15. 46</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_1'>16. 1</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_13'>ch. 11. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_39'>12. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_32'>13. 32</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_3'>2 Macc. 3. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_24'>10. 24</a>. Comp. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN692"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN693"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN694"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_10"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>ch. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN695"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_14"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_9'>ch. 1. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_15'>6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN696"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_15'>ver. 15</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>ch. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN697"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_16"><span class="notemark">ff</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_16'>ch. 15. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN698"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_17"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_11'>2 Macc. 4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN699"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_17"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_1'>7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_1'>12. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>16</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_16'>14. 16</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>24</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_40'>40</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_15'>15. 15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_16'>16</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_11'>2 Macc. 4. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_10'>8. 10</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M28_36'>36</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN700"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN701"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_18"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN702"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_19"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_15'>ver. 15</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>ch. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN703"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_19"><span class="notemark">j</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S19_17'>1 Sam. 9. 17</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG18_14'>Judg. 18. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN704"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_20"><span class="notemark">k</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_4'>ch. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN705"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_21"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_60'>ch. 6. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN706"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_22"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_18'>ch. 14. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN707"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_23"><span class="notemark">m</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_1'>ch. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN708"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_23"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_32'>ver. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN709"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_31"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_1'>ch. 7. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN710"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_31"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN711"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_31"><span class="notemark">q</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_40'>ch. 14. 40</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_17'>15. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN712"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_32"><span class="notemark">r</span> 8.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_2'>Rom. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN713"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M18_32"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_32'>ver. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN714"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_43'>ch. 7. 43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_44'>44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN715"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>he added</span>, or, <span class='add'>proceeded to send</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_72'>ver. 72</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_88'>ch. 10. 88</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_15'>ch. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN716"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_1"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN717"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_20'>ch. 7. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_25'>25</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_26'>26</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_8'>ch. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN718"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the right wing</span>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_12'>ver. 12</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN719"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Galilea</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN720"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN721"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_38'>ch. 2. 38</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN722"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 161–160].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN723"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Berretho</span>, Jos[eph].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN724"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">As <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_40'>ch. 7. 40</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_45'>45</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN725"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">We follow here the Roman copy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN726"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_16'>Luke 20. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN727"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>let us not leave any just cause behind us, why our glory should be spoken against</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN728"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>the Jews</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN729"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN730"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_12"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ver. 1</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_15'>15</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN731"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_12"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN732"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_14"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ver. 1</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_15'>15</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN733"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_15"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ver. 1</a> (Gk.), <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_15'>15</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN734"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_34'>Josh. 19. 34</a>? See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN735"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_17"><span class="notemark">j</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>ch. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN736"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_19"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_33'>ver. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_37'>37</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>62</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_3'>ch. 2. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_5'>5</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_74'>10. 74</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_59'>11. 59</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_33'>12. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_38'>38</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_1'>13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN737"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ch. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN738"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_20"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_26'>ch. 13. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN739"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_22"><span class="notemark">mm</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_23'>ch. 16. 23</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN740"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_22"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN21_25'>John 21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN741"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN742"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_23"><span class="notemark">p</span> 9.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_23'>Matt. 7. 23</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>ch. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN743"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>Bacchides and his company</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN744"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_25"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN745"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>mocked them</span>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT2_16'>Matt. 2. 16</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN746"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_27"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_46'>ch. 4. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN747"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_28"><span class="notemark">r</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN748"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_28"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_33'>ver. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_37'>37</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>62</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_3'>ch. 2. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_5'>5</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_74'>10. 74</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_59'>11. 59</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_33'>12. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_38'>38</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_1'>13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN749"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_29"><span class="notemark">s</span> 9.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN750"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_33"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_33'>ver. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_37'>37</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>62</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_3'>ch. 2. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_5'>5</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_74'>10. 74</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_59'>11. 59</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_33'>12. 33</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_38'>38</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_1'>13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN751"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_33"><span class="notemark">t</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_20'>2 Chr. 20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN752"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_33"><span class="notemark">u</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2SA.xhtml#S214_2'>2 Sam. 14. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN753"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Which when Bacchides understood on the sabbath day, he came near</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN754"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_34"><span class="notemark">w</span> 9.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_25'>Matt. 4. 25</a>, &amp;c. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_43'>ver. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN755"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Jos[eph]. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 1.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN756"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_35"><span class="notemark">x</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN757"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_35"><span class="notemark">y</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ch. 5. 25</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_31'>ch. 12. 31</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN758"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>that</span> he <span class='add'>might leave with them their</span> <span class="notemark">z</span> <span class='add'>carriage</span>, or, <span class="notemark">a</span> <span class='add'>stuff</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN759"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_35"><span class="notemark">z</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_39'>ver. 39</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_17'>Judith 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN760"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">[Gr. <span class='add'>Ambri</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN761"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_36"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R119_7'>1 Chr. 19. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN762"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_36"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_42'>ver. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN763"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Medaba</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN764"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_37"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_2'>Judith. 5. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN765"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_39"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_35'>ver. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN766"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>timbrels</span>. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_2'>1 Esdr. 5. 2</a> (Gk.). <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_7'>Judith 3. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_2'>16. 2</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_20'>Ex. 15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN767"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>musicians</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN768"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_39"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_63'>1 Esdr. 4. 63</a>. &amp; <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_2'>5. 2</a>, <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_59'>59</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_41'>ver. 41</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN769"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_40"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_26'>Song 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN770"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_40"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_68'>ch. 11. 68</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_69'>69</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_36'>ch. 1. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN771"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_40"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>ch. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN772"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_41"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_63'>1 Esdr. 4. 63</a>. &amp; <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_2'>5. 2</a>, <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_59'>59</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_41'>ver. 41</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN773"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_42"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_45'>ver. 45</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_15'>Josh. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN774"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_43"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN775"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_44"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 9.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_41'>ch. 2. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN776"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_44"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>Susanna 15</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN777"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_45"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_45'>ver. 45</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_15'>Josh. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN778"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_46"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.46</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_60'>ch. 3. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN779"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_49"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class='add'>two thousand men</span>. Joseph. Ant[iq.] lib. 13. cap. 1.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN780"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>built</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>ver. 62</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_0'>ch. 10</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_0'>12</a>. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG21_23'>Judges 21. 23</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN781"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_14'>Ecclus. 24. 14</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_14'>ch. 16. 14</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_15'>2 Macc. 12. 15</a>. See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_34'>Ezra 2. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN782"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">p</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_40'>ch. 3. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN783"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_16'>ch. 3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN784"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">r</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS16_2'>Josh. 16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN785"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">s</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R228_18'>2 Chr. 28. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN786"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">t</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2SA.xhtml#S223_30'>2 Sam. 23. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN787"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Joseph. <span class='add'>Tecoa</span>. [Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_33'>ver. 33</a>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN788"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">u</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_34'>Josh. 15. 34</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN789"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_50"><span class="notemark">v</span> 9.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_33'>ch. 13. 33</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_38'>ch. 12. 38</a>. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH3_3'>Neh. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN790"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_52"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>the city in Bethsura</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN791"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_52"><span class="notemark">w</span> 9.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ch. 4. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN792"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_52"><span class="notemark">x</span> 9.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN793"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_52"><span class="notemark">y</span> 9.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN794"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_52"><span class="notemark">z</span> 9.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_53'>ch. 6. 53</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN795"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_53"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_6'>ch. 10. 6</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN796"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_53"><span class="notemark">y</span> 9.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN797"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.54</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 160.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN798"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_54"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.54</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN799"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_54"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK42_20'>Ezek. 42. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN800"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_54"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_17'>Ezek. 44. 17</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN801"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_55"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.55</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2SA.xhtml#S217_23'>2 Sam. 17. 23</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_1'>2 Kin. 20. 1</a> in the Gk. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_13'>2 Esdr. 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN802"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_57"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN803"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_57"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_50'>ch. 7. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN804"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_58"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.58</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 158.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN805"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_58"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.58</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN806"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_62"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.62</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN807"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_62"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>ver. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN808"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_62"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN809"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_63"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.63</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>to such of the country as were his friends to take his part</span>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>ver. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN810"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_65"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.65</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>ver. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN811"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_66"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.66</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Odomarra</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN812"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_67"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.67</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_62'>ver. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN813"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_67"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.67</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_64'>ver. 64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN814"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_69"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.69</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN815"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_69"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.69</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_58'>ver. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN816"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_70"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.70</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_4'>ch. 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN817"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_72"><span class="notemark">p</span> 9.72</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_33'>ch. 10. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN818"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_72"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.72</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>added he to come any more</span>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN819"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_73"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.73</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S113_2'>1 Sam. 13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN820"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_73"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.73</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>judge</span>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_22'>2 Kin. 23. 22</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN821"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M19_73"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.73</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_5'>ch. 7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN822"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 153.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN823"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Jos[eph.] <span class='add'>the son of Antiochus Epiphanes</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN824"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_39'>ver. 39</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_56'>56</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_57'>57</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_58'>58</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_60'>60</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN825"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_1'>ch. 7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>9. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN826"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_73'>ch. 9. 73</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN827"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_4"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_4'>ver. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN828"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_70'>ch. 9. 70</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN829"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_46'>ver. 46</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_0'>ch. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_0'>ch. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN830"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_53'>ch. 9. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN831"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN832"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_32'>ver. 32</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN833"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_73'>ch. 9. 73</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN834"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_32'>ver. 32</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN835"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_41'>Mark 4. 41</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_9'>Luke 2. 9</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN836"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_32'>ver. 32</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN837"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN838"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_45'>ver. 45</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>ch. 6. 62</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_36'>12. 36</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_10'>13. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_37'>14. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN839"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ch. 9. 50</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_51'>51</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_41'>ch. 11. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN840"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_14"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_52'>ch. 9. 52</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_65'>ch. 11. 65</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN841"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN842"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN843"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_18"><span class="notemark">oo</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_30'>ch. 11. 30</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_22'>2 Macc. 11. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN844"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_20"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_65'>ver. 65</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_38'>ch. 3. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_8'>7. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_27'>11. 27</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_57'>57</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_36'>13. 36</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_39'>14. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_32'>15. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN845"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_20"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_62'>ver. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN846"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_58'>ch. 11. 58</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_43'>14. 43</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ch. 13. 37</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_4'>2 Macc. 14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN847"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_20"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_23'>Matt. 16. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN848"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_34'>Lev. 23. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN849"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">B.C. 153.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN850"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_34'>Lev. 23. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN851"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_2'>Ex. 28. 2</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_11'>Ecclus. 50. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN852"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_23"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_4'>ver. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN853"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_7'>Wisd. 4. 7</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN854"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ch. 13. 37</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_34'>ver. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_34'>ch. 13. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN855"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_29"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_35'>ch. 11. 35</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN856"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_29"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_35'>ch. 11. 35</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN857"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_29"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_35'>ch. 11. 35</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN858"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_39'>ch. 13. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN859"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_30"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK15_12'>Luke 15. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN860"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_30"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_38'>ver. 38</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_34'>ch. 11. 34</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN861"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_30"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_10'>ch. 3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN862"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_7'>ch. 2. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_7'>ch. 15. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN863"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_31"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_58'>ch. 11. 58</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_43'>14. 43</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ch. 13. 37</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_4'>2 Macc. 14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN864"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_31"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_35'>ch. 11. 35</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN865"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_31"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_35'>ch. 11. 35</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN866"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_31"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT17_25'>Matt. 17. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN867"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_32"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_7'>7</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_9'>9</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN868"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_32"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN869"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_33"><span class="notemark">j</span> 10.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_32'>ch. 1. 32</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_72'>ch. 9. 72</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN870"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_34"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_6'>Judith 8. 6</a>. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_13'>Isai. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN871"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_34"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_6'>Judith 8. 6</a>. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_13'>Isai. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN872"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_34"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_28'>ver. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN873"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_35"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_63'>ver. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN874"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_36"><span class="notemark">mm</span> 10.36</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_40'>ch. 13. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN875"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_37"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_42'>ver. 42</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_63'>ch. 11. 63</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_45'>12. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_15'>13. 15</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC6_3'>Acts 6. 3</a> in the Gk. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ch. 13. 37</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_41'>ver. 41</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN876"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>walk</span>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_10'>Ps. 78. 10</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN877"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_38"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_38'>ver. 38</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_34'>ch. 11. 34</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN878"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_38"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_10'>ch. 3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN879"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_38"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN880"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_39"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ver. 1</a>. Also <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_57'>ch. 11. 57</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_45'>12. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN881"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of the holy</span> things. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_12'>ch. 2. 12</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_16'>2 Macc. 9. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN882"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_41"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.41</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_10'>Judith 12. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_37'>ver. 37</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_42'>42</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN883"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_42"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 10.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_34'>ch. 11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN884"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_42"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_42'>ver. 42</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_63'>ch. 11. 63</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_45'>12. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_15'>13. 15</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC6_3'>Acts 6. 3</a> in the Gk. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ch. 13. 37</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_41'>ver. 41</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN885"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_43"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN886"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_44"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_36'>ch. 4. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN887"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_45"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN888"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_46"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.46</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN889"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.48</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 150.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN890"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_51"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>ch. 1. 18</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_1'>Esther 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN891"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_56"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.56</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN892"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_57"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN893"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.57</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 151–150.]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN894"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_58"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.58</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN895"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_60"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.60</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN896"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_60"><span class="notemark">y</span> 10.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_24'>ch. 11. 24</a>. See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_12'>Baruch 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN897"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_61"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_3'>ch. 15. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_21'>21</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC24_5'>Acts 24. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN898"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_61"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_21'>ch. 11. 21</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN899"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_61"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_63'>ver. 63</a> <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_36'>2 Macc. 4. 36</a> in the Gk. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_2'>Rom. 11. 2</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_64'>ver. 64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN900"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_62"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_29'>Dan. 5. 29</a> (Gk.). <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ver. 20</a>. See <a href='EST.xhtml#ET8_15'>Esther 8. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN901"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_63"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_43'>Gen. 41. 43</a>. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET6_9'>Esther 6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN902"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_63"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_63'>ver. 63</a> <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_36'>2 Macc. 4. 36</a> in the Gk. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_2'>Rom. 11. 2</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_64'>ver. 64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN903"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_63"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_27'>Song 27</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_35'>ver. 35</a> (Gk.). <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_14'>ch. 12. 14</a> (Gk.). <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_19'>Acts 15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN904"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_64"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.64</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_63'>ver. 63</a> <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_36'>2 Macc. 4. 36</a> in the Gk. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_2'>Rom. 11. 2</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_64'>ver. 64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN905"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_65"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.65</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN906"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_65"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.65</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN36_40'>Gen. 36. 40–43</a>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_51'>1 Chr. 1. 51–54</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN907"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_65"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.65</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>governor of a province</span>. Comp. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E11_4'>1 Esdr. 1. 4</a> (Gk.), and places in marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN908"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_67"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.67</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 148.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN909"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_67"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.67</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN910"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_67"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.67</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_11'>Acts 2. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_38'>ch. 11. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_1'>15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN911"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_68"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.68</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_37'>ch. 3. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN912"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_69"><span class="notemark">j</span> 10.69</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_5'>2 Macc. 3. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_4'>4. 4</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN913"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_69"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.69</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E12_17'>1 Esdr. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN914"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_69"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.69</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN915"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_70"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.70</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_11'>Deut. 11. 11</a>. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_23'>1 Kin. 20. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN916"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_71"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.71</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_11'>Deut. 11. 11</a>. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_23'>1 Kin. 20. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN917"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_72"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.72</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_60'>ch. 5. 60</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_17'>9. 17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN918"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_73"><span class="notemark">nn</span> 10.73</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_16'>2 Macc. 1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN919"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_74"><span class="notemark">j</span> 10.74</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_5'>2 Macc. 3. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_4'>4. 4</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN920"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_74"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.74</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ch. 9. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN921"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_75"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.75</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_6'>ch. 11. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN922"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_77"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.77</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN923"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_77"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.77</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as though he would pass through</span> it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN924"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_77"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.77</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>led</span> his company.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN925"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_77"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.77</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_77'>ver. 77</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN926"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_78"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.78</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN927"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_80"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.80</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_16'>Acts 23. 16</a> (Gk.). <a href='2CH.xhtml#R213_13'>2 Chr. 13. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_20'>20. 22</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN928"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_81"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.81</a>
 <span class="ft">Jos[eph.] Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 8.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN929"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_81"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.81</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_79'>ver. 79</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_82'>82</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN930"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_83"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.83</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_77'>ver. 77</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN931"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_83"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.83</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN932"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_83"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.83</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_84'>ver. 84</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_4'>ch. 11. 4</a>. See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG16_23'>Judg. 16. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN933"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_83"><span class="notemark">v</span> 10.83</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_47'>ch. 1. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN934"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_84"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.84</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_84'>ver. 84</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_4'>ch. 11. 4</a>. See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG16_23'>Judg. 16. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN935"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_86"><span class="notemark">w</span> 10.86</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_28'>Judith 2. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN936"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_88"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.88</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_65'>ver. 65</a>. Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN937"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_89"><span class="notemark">y</span> 10.89</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_58'>ch. 11. 58</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_44'>14. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN938"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M110_89"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.89</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_45'>Josh. 15. 45</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_46'>46</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_11'>Josh. 15. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_7'>Zech. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN939"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 146.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN940"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_51'>ch. 10. 51–58</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_1'>Esther 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN941"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_13'>Song 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN942"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_30'>ch. 1. 30</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_15'>7. 15</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN943"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_51'>ch. 10. 51–58</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_1'>Esther 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN944"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN945"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_84'>ch. 10. 84</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_61'>ver. 61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN946"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_84'>ch. 10. 84</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_61'>ver. 61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN947"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_36'>Matt. 9. 36</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN948"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_33'>ch. 12. 33</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>13. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_5'>14. 5</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_46'>Josh. 19. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN949"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>slept</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_4'>ch. 16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN950"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_30'>ch. 12. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN951"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_8"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_51'>ch. 10. 51–58</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_1'>Esther 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN952"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_4'>Acts 13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN953"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_15'>Luke 3. 15</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN954"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_67'>ch. 10. 67</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN955"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN3_19'>Dan. 3. 19</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_2'>Gen. 31. 2</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN956"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_56'>56</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_37'>ch. 3. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN957"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_13"><span class="notemark">nn</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_6'>ch. 8. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN958"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_21'>Judith 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN959"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_39'>ver. 39</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_39'>ch. 5. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN960"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_39'>ver. 39</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_39'>ch. 5. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN961"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>and those that were in the holds were slain of those that were in the holds</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN962"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_19"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_7'>2 Macc. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN963"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 145.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN964"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN965"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_20"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_41'>ver. 41</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN966"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN967"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN968"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_41'>ver. 41</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN969"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN970"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_22"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_41'>ver. 41</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN971"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_23"><span class="notemark">w</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_44'>ch. 6. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN972"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN973"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_60'>ch. 10. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN974"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN975"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN976"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_25"><span class="notemark">z</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_2'>Rom. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN977"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_26"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_62'>ch. 10. 62–65</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN978"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_27"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_38'>14. 38</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_57'>ver. 57</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN979"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_27"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN980"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_28"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_29'>ch. 10. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN981"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_28"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_30'>ch. 10. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN982"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_30"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_18'>ch. 10. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN983"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 8.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN984"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_30'>ch. 10. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN985"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC9_32'>Acts 9. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN986"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_19'>1 Sam. 1. 19</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN987"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_42'>ch. 10. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN988"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_30'>ch. 10. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN989"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_34"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_30'>ch. 10. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN990"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_35"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_31'>ch. 10. 31</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN991"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_35"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_31'>ch. 10. 31</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN992"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_35"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_29'>ch. 10. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN993"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_35"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_29'>ch. 10. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN994"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_36"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>ch. 6. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN995"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_38"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_67'>ch. 10. 67</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN996"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_38"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_29'>ch. 6. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN997"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_39"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN998"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_40"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_54'>ver. 54</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_56'>56</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_39'>ch. 12. 39</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN999"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_41"><span class="notemark">s</span> 11.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_20'>ver. 20–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1000"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_41"><span class="notemark">t</span> 11.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ch. 9. 50–52</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_12'>ch. 10. 12–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1001"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_43"><span class="notemark">u</span> 11.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1002"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_44"><span class="notemark">w</span> 11.44</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1003"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Be friends with us</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_62'>ver. 62</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_58'>ch. 6. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1004"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_52"><span class="notemark">x</span> 11.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_38'>ver. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1005"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.54</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 144.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1006"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_54"><span class="notemark">y</span> 11.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1007"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_54"><span class="notemark">z</span> 11.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_39'>ver. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1008"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_56"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.56</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>beasts</span>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_20'>2 Macc. 15. 20</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_21'>21</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_17'>ch. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1009"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_56"><span class="notemark">w</span> 11.56</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1010"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_57"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1011"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_57"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_39'>ch. 10. 39</a> and <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1012"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_57"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1013"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_58"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.58</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>and service</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1014"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_58"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 11.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_43'>14. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1015"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_58"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_89'>ch. 10. 89</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_44'>14. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1016"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_59"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ch. 9. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1017"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_59"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 11.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_18'>2 Macc. 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1018"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_60"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.60</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>went beyond the river, and passed through the cities</span>, or, <span class='add'>went and passed beyond the river and through the cities</span>, Gr.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1019"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_60"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.60</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_28'>Judith 2. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1020"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_61"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_43'>ch. 13. 43</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_47'>Josh. 15. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1021"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_61"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the places there-about</span>. Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1022"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_62"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.62</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>he gave them the right hand</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_50'>ver. 50</a> (Gk.). <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_26'>2 Macc. 11. 26</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_58'>ch. 6. 58</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_66'>ver. 66</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1023"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_62"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.62</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1024"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_62"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.62</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_8'>Isai. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1025"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_63"><span class="notemark">j</span> 11.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_24'>ch. 12. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1026"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_63"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_73'>ver. 73</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_2'>Tobit 1. 2</a> marg. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_37'>Josh. 19. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1027"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_63"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to remove him from the</span> <span class="notemark">l</span> <span class='add'>affairs</span> of the kingdom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1028"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_65"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.65</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_14'>ch. 10. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>14. 7</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ch. 4. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1029"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_66"><span class="notemark">mm</span> 11.66</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_50'>ch. 13. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1030"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_66"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.66</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_14'>ch. 10. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>14. 7</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ch. 4. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1031"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_67"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.67</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_1'>Luke 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1032"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_67"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.67</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_36'>Josh. 19. 36</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_1'>Josh. 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1033"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_68"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.68</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_40'>ch. 9. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1034"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_69"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.69</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_40'>ch. 9. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1035"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_70"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.70</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_17'>2 Macc. 11. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1036"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_71"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.71</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_14'>ch. 2. 14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1037"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_71"><span class="notemark">s</span> 11.71</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_47'>ch. 3. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1038"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_73"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.73</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_73'>ver. 73</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_2'>Tobit 1. 2</a> marg. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_37'>Josh. 19. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1039"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M111_73"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.73</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_73'>ver. 73</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_2'>Tobit 1. 2</a> marg. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_37'>Josh. 19. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1040"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>ver. 16</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>ver. 3</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1041"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>ver. 16</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>ver. 3</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1042"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_23'>ch. 8. 23–32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1043"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_2"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_9'>2 Macc. 5. 9</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_16'>ch. 14. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1044"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>ver. 16</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_3'>ver. 3</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1045"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_19'>ch. 8. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1046"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1047"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_10'>2 Macc. 1. 10</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ch. 14. 20</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>Judith 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1048"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_1'>Ecclus. 50. 1</a>? or see <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_1'>2 Macc. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1049"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class='add'>Areus</span> : See Joseph. Ant[iq.] lib. 13. cap. 8. [Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_20'>ver. 20</a>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1050"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_20'>ver. 20–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1051"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_31'>Matt. 18. 31</a> (Gk.). See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_18'>2 Macc. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1052"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or,<span class='add'>kindred</span>. Jos[eph.] Ant[iq.]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1053"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_4'>Rom. 15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1054"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1TH.xhtml#H11_3'>1 Thess. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1055"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_63'>ch. 10. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1056"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_16"><span class="notemark">kk</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_22'>ch. 14. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>24</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_15'>15. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1057"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1058"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Read out of Jos[eph.] <span class='add'>which Areus sent toOnias</span>. [Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_7'>ver. 7</a>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1059"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_21"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_9'>2 Macc. 5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1060"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>peace</span>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB13_14'>Tobit 13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1061"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_24"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_63'>ch. 11. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1062"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_25"><span class="notemark">n</span> 12.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_65'>1 Kin. 8. 65</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1063"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to set foot in his country</span>: or, <span class='add'>to invade his country</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_20'>ch. 13 20</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_31'>14. 31</a>. &amp;. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_40'>15. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1064"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_27"><span class="notemark">o</span> 12.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_4'>John 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1065"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Joseph. Ant[iq.] lib. 13. [cap.] 9. <span class='add'>they went away</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1066"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_30"><span class="notemark">p</span> 12.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_7'>ch. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1067"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_31"><span class="notemark">q</span> 12.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_39'>ch. 5. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1068"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Jos[eph.] Gr. <span class='add'>Nabatheans</span>, or, <span class='add'>Zabatheans</span>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_25'>ch. 5. 25</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_35'>9. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1069"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_32"><span class="notemark">r</span> 12.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_8'>Isai. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1070"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_33"><span class="notemark">s</span> 12.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ch. 9. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1071"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_33"><span class="notemark">t</span> 12.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_28'>Judith 2. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1072"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_33"><span class="notemark">u</span> 12.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_6'>ch. 11. 6</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1073"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_34"><span class="notemark">v</span> 12.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_24'>ver. 24</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1074"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_35"><span class="notemark">vv</span> 12.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_33'>ch. 13. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1075"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_36"><span class="notemark">w</span> 12.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_11'>ch. 10. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_10'>ch. 13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1076"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_36"><span class="notemark">x</span> 12.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1077"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_36"><span class="notemark">y</span> 12.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_49'>ch. 13. 49</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_21'>ch. 13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1078"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, according to the Roman reading, <span class='add'>and he came near to the wall of the brook toward the east</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1079"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_38"><span class="notemark">z</span> 12.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_13'>ch. 13. 13</a>. So <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_33'>Ezra 2. 33</a>. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_37'>Neh. 7. 37</a>. &amp; <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH11_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1080"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_38"><span class="notemark">z</span> 12.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_13'>ch. 13. 13</a>. So <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_33'>Ezra 2. 33</a>. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_37'>Neh. 7. 37</a>. &amp; <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH11_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1081"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_38"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ch. 9. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1082"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_39"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_39'>ch. 11. 39</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_54'>54</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_56'>56</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_1'>13. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1083"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_39"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_6'>ch. 8. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1084"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_39"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_31'>ch. 13. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1085"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_39"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Supplied from <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_13'>ch. 11. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1086"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_40"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_52'>ch. 5. 52</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_11'>Josh. 17. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1087"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_41"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_26'>ch. 3. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1088"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_41"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_52'>ch. 5. 52</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_11'>Josh. 17. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1089"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_45"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1090"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_45"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_39'>ch. 10. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1091"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_45"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_37'>ch. 10. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1092"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="notemark">k</span> <span class='add'>left two thousand in Galilee</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1093"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_47"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1094"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_48"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.48</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1095"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_49"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>Judith 1. 8</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_52'>ch. 5. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1096"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_49"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1097"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_50"><span class="notemark">n</span> 12.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_12'>ch. 13. 12</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1098"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M112_53"><span class="notemark">o</span> 12.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_35'>ch. 3. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1099"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_19'>ch. 9. 19</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_65'>ch. 2. 65</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_39'>ch. 11. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_21'>Heb. 12. 21</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_43'>ch. 6. 43–46</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_18'>9. 18</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_36'>36</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_50'>12. 50</a> (comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_12'>ver. 12</a>, &amp;c.). <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_4'>1 Kin. 19. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2TI.xhtml#T21_6'>2 Tim. 1. 6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_28'>ch. 9. 28–31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_36'>ch. 12. 36</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_37'>37</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_37'>14. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_70'>ch. 11. 70</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_6'>ch. 11. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_33'>12. 33</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_5'>14. 5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_34'>34</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_28'>15. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_35'>35</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_46'>Josh. 19. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_34'>ch. 12. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_50'>ch. 12. 50</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_38'>ch. 12. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_38'>ch. 12. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>for the affairs</span>, or, <span class='add'>offices that he had</span>, [or], <span class='add'>for the necessary uses which he had</span>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_37'>ch. 10. 37</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ver. 37</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_10'>ch. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_20"><span class="notemark">s</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R211_9'>2 Chr. 11. 9</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_21"><span class="notemark">u</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_49'>ver. 49</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_36'>ch. 12. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S111_8'>1 Sam. 11. 8</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 143.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_30'>ver. 30</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ch. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_26"><span class="notemark">z</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_20'>ch. 9. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_27'>Ezek. 32. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_29"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_24'>Ecclus. 43. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_30"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_30"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_8'>Matt. 27. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT28_15'>28. 15</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_29'>Acts 2. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_39'>ch. 12. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_32"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_0'>ch. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_33"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_38'>ver. 38</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_35'>ch. 12. 35</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_3'>ch. 14. 3</a> &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_7'>15. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_33"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ch. 9. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in the strong holds</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_34"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_55'>ch. 11. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>all Tryphon’s doings were robberies</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_36"><span class="notemark">j</span> 13.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_38'>ch. 14. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_36"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_36"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_37"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M214_4'>2 Macc. 14. 4</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_37"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Rather comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_51'>ver. 51</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_37"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_28'>ch. 3. 28</a>, marg. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_24'>2 Macc. 7. 24</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_39'>12. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_5'>15. 5</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_28'>28</a> in the Gk. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_37'>ch. 10. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_37"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.37</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_28'>ch. 10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_38"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_38'>ver. 38</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_35'>ch. 12. 35</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_3'>ch. 14. 3</a> &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_7'>15. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_39"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_29'>ch. 10. 29</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_35'>11. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_39"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 13.39</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_8'>ch. 15. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_40"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.40</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_36'>ch. 10. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.41</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 143–2].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_42"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_27'>ch. 14. 27</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_43'>43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_43"><span class="notemark">s</span> 13.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_61'>ch. 11. 61</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_62'>62</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_47'>Josh. 15. 47</a>. But comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_34'>ch. 14. 34</a> marg. with <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_48'>ver. 48</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>53</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>ch. 14. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_45"><span class="notemark">t</span> 13.45</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_14'>ch. 5. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>to give them</span> his <span class='add'>right hand</span>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_58'>ch. 6. 58</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_47"><span class="notemark">u</span> 13.47</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_51'>ver. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_48"><span class="notemark">w</span> 13.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_43'>ver. 43</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_49"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.49</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 142.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_49"><span class="notemark">x</span> 13.49</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_49"><span class="notemark">y</span> 13.49</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ch. 3. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_49"><span class="notemark">z</span> 13.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_36'>ch. 12. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_49"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to make peace with them</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_66'>ch. 11. 66</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_45'>ver. 45</a>. See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_5'>2 Macc. 1. 5</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_50"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 13.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>ch. 14. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_50"><span class="notemark">x</span> 13.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 142–141.]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_7'>2 Macc. 10. 7</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_38'>38</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_13'>John 12. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_37'>ver. 37</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_15'>Ecclus. 39. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R115_16'>1 Chr. 15. 16</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R115_28'>28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_54'>ch. 4. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R115_16'>1 Chr. 15. 16</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R115_28'>28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_7'>2 Macc. 10. 7</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_38'>38</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_47'>ver. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_51"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_34'>ch. 1. 34–36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_52"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_37'>ch. 14. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_52"><span class="notemark">x</span> 13.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_53"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_1'>ch. 16. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_2'>2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_9'>9</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_19'>19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_21'>21–24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_53"><span class="notemark">j</span> 13.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_1'>ch 16. 1</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M113_53"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 141.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_14'>Tobit 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_32'>ch. 13. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_22'>ch. 15. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_2"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_13'>2 Macc. 1. 13</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_19'>19</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_20'>20</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_33'>33</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_31'>ch. 3. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_14'>Tobit 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_50'>ch. 7. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_34'>ver. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_28'>ch. 15. 28</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_29'>ch. 6. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_43'>ch. 13. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_65'>ch. 11. 65</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_66'>66</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_33'>ver. 33</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_29'>ch. 4. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_50'>ch. 13. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS67_6'>Ps. 67. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the wealth of the land</span>. Gk. as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB40_10'>Job 40. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_25'>1 Kin. 4. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_20'>Ecclus. 22. 20</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_40'>40</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_2'>ch. 12. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_6'>6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_20'>20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_21'>21</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_23'>15. 23</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_23'>23</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_23'>ch. 12. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_48'>48</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_22'>ch. 8. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_20'>ch. 8. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_18"><span class="notemark">u</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_1'>ch. 12. 1–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_2'>ch. 12. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_6'>6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_20'>20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_21'>21</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_23'>15. 23</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_23'>23</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_2'>ch. 12. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_6'>6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_20'>20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_21'>21</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_23'>15. 23</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_23'>23</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_20"><span class="notemark">v</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_6'>ch. 12. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_20"><span class="notemark">w</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_23'>Acts 15. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_21"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>ch. 12. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_15'>15. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.22</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>publick records</span>]. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_22"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>ch. 12. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_15'>15. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_32'>Luke 14. 32</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_23"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_2'>ch. 12. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_5'>5</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_6'>6</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_20'>20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_21'>21</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_23'>15. 23</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_23'>23</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_16'>ch. 12. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_15'>15. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_24"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_40'>40</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_24"><span class="notemark">z</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_45'>1 Esdr. 5. 45</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_18'>ch 15. 18</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_13'>Luke 19. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_25"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_49'>ver. 49</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>ch. 13. 53</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_1'>16. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_2'>2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_9'>9</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_13'>13</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_26"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_2'>ch. 16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_27"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_27"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH6_15'>Neh. 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 141–140].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_27"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_42'>ch. 13. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Jerusalem</span>, peradventure by corruption and transposition of letters; or, as some think, <span class='add'>the common hall where they met to consult of matters of estate</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_29"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_3'>ch. 2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_29"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ch. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_29"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_44'>ch. 6. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_30"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_30"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_22'>Judith 16. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_31"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_1'>ch. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the men of war</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_32"><span class="notemark">j</span> 14.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_28'>ch. 3. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_33"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_33'>ch. 13. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_33"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>weapons</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_43'>ch. 5. 43</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_6'>10. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_33"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_42'>ver. 42</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_7'>ch. 15. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_14'>ch. 10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_34"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_5'>ver. 5</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Gaza</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_43'>ch. 13. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_34"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_34"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_35"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_36'>ch. 13. 36</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_42'>42</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_41'>ver. 41</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_38'>38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_47'>47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_36"><span class="notemark">oo</span> 14.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_2'>ch. 16. 2</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_6'>ch. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_36"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_47'>ch. 13. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_36"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_50'>ch. 13. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_36"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>unto religion</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_37"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_52'>ch. 13. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_37"><span class="notemark">t</span> 14.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_10'>ch. 13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_38"><span class="notemark">u</span> 14.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_36'>ch. 13. 36</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_27'>ch. 11. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_39"><span class="notemark">w</span> 14.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_40"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_31'>ch. 8. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_17'>15. 17</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_40"><span class="notemark">y</span> 14.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_41"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_36'>ch. 13. 36</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_42'>42</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_41'>ver. 41</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_38'>38</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_47'>47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_41"><span class="notemark">z</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_13'>2 Sam. 7. 13</a>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R117_12'>1 Chr. 17. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_41"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_46'>ch. 4. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_41"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_15'>Deut. 18. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_43"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_42'>ch. 13. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_43"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_58'>11. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_44"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.44</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>ch. 6. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_44"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_89'>ch. 10. 89</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_58'>11. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_45"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>ch. 6. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_45"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_21'>Matt. 5. 21</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_22'>22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_47"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.47</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_35'>ver. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_47"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_1'>ch. 15. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_2'>2</a> (Gk.). <a href='2CO.xhtml#C211_32'>2 Cor. 11. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_48"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.48</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_49"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_20'>John 8. 20</a>. So <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_41'>Mark 12. 41</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_1'>Luke 21. 1</a>. See <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_6'>2 Macc. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M114_49"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.49</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 140.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_1'>ch. 7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_50'>10. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_29'>ch. 6. 29</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_67'>ch. 10. 67</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_47'>ch. 14. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M211_16'>2 Macc. 11. 16</a>. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_25'>Acts 23. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_47'>ch. 14. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_21'>ver. 21</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC24_5'>Acts 24. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_3"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_32'>ch. 13. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_34'>ch. 13. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_40'>ch. 10. 40–43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_31'>ch. 10. 31</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_33'>ch. 13. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_29'>ch. 10. 29</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_39'>13. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 139.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_34'>ch. 13. 34</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_13'>ver. 13</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>25</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_2'>Josh. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_13'>ver. 13</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>25</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_2'>Josh. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>ver. 25</a> (Gk.). See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>ch. 3. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>ch. 14. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_16'>ch. 8. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_16"><span class="notemark">rr</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_10'>2 Macc. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_40'>ch. 14. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_23'>ch. 8. 23–32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>ch. 14. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_24'>ch. 14. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_21"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_21'>ver. 21</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_61'>ch. 10. 61</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC24_5'>Acts 24. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_67'>ch. 10. 67</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Arathes</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_2'>ch. 14. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Sampsaces</span> [Lat. <span class='add'>Lampsacus</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_16'>ch. 14. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC20_15'>Acts 20. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_10'>Acts 2. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_13'>13. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_24'>14. 24</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_38'>15. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_5'>27. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_5'>Acts 27. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_1'>Acts 21. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Basilis</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_1'>Acts 21. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_7'>Acts 27. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC4_36'>Acts 4. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_23"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_10'>Acts 2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_25"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>bringing</span> his <span class='add'>forces to it</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_25"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_27"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_62'>ch. 6. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_27"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_3'>ver. 3–9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_28"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_5'>ch. 14. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_35'>ver. 35</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_28"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>ch. 14. 7</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_35'>ver. 35</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_28"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_50'>ch. 13. 50</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_51'>51</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_33'>ch. 1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_29"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_30"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>except the borders, &amp;c.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>subdue you in fight</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_32"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_32"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_5'>1 Kin. 10. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_35"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_5'>ch. 14. 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_35'>ver. 35</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_35"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_7'>ch. 14. 7</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_35'>ver. 35</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_35"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_37"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_39'>39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_38"><span class="notemark">r</span> 15.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_1'>ch. 16. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_4'>4</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.39</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>Gedor</span>]. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_58'>Josh. 15. 58</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_41'>ver. 41</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_9'>ch. 16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_39"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>ver. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_39'>39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_40"><span class="notemark">r</span> 15.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_1'>ch. 16. 1</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_4'>4</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M115_40"><span class="notemark">s</span> 15.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>ch. 13. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>ch. 13. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_19'>ver. 19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_21'>21</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_40'>ch. 15. 40</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_41'>41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_53'>ch. 13. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_26'>ch. 14. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_2"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M114_36'>ch. 14. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_3"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_23'>ch. 13. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_6'>ch. 11. 6</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_1'>ch. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_54'>ch. 3. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>ch. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_39'>ch. 15. 39</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_41'>41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_39'>ch. 15. 39</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_41'>41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Which when he had set</span> [<span class='add'>on</span>] <span class='add'>fire, they fled unto the towers in the fields of Azotus; and there were slain, &amp;c.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 135.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_5'>2 Kin. 25. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_50'>ch. 9. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 135].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC1_7'>Zech. 1. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_34'>Gen. 43. 34</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN2_10'>John 2. 10</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_25'>ch. 15. 25</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M115_38'>38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_19"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_19'>ver. 19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_21'>21</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>captains of thousands</span>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_12'>Judith 14. 12</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_21'>Mark 6. 21</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC25_23'>Acts 25. 23</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_15'>Rev. 6. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_18'>19. 18</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_19"><span class="notemark">t</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_21"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_19'>ver. 19</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_21'>21</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_21"><span class="notemark">u</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_50'>ch. 1. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#M116_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_22'>ch. 9. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

