<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 1 Peter 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Peter</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_0'>5</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='P10_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF PETER  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='P11_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="P11_1">1&#160;</span> Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
<span class="verse" id="P11_2">2&#160;</span>Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P11_3">3&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abundant mercy hath begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
<span class="verse" id="P11_4">4&#160;</span> To an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for you,
<span class="verse" id="P11_5">5&#160;</span> Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
<span class="verse" id="P11_6">6&#160;</span> Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations:
<span class="verse" id="P11_7">7&#160;</span> That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ:
<span class="verse" id="P11_8">8&#160;</span> Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see <span class='add'>him</span> not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory:
<span class="verse" id="P11_9">9&#160;</span> Receiving the end of your faith, <span class='add'>even</span> the salvation of <span class='add'>your</span> souls.
<span class="verse" id="P11_10">10&#160;</span> Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace <span class='add'>that should come</span> unto you:
<span class="verse" id="P11_11">11&#160;</span> Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.
<span class="verse" id="P11_12">12&#160;</span> Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look into.
<span class="verse" id="P11_13">13&#160;</span> Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ;
<span class="verse" id="P11_14">14&#160;</span> As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance:
<span class="verse" id="P11_15">15&#160;</span> But as he which hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
<span class="verse" id="P11_16">16&#160;</span> Because it is written, <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be ye holy; for I am holy.
<span class="verse" id="P11_17">17&#160;</span> And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons judgeth according to every man’s work, pass the time of your sojourning <span class='add'>here</span> in fear:
<span class="verse" id="P11_18">18&#160;</span> Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, <span class='add'>as</span> silver and gold, from your vain conversation <span class='add'>received</span> by tradition from your fathers;
<span class="verse" id="P11_19">19&#160;</span> But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot:
<span class="verse" id="P11_20">20&#160;</span> Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you,
<span class="verse" id="P11_21">21&#160;</span> Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God.
<span class="verse" id="P11_22">22&#160;</span> Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, <span class='add'>see that ye</span> love one another with a pure heart fervently:
<span class="verse" id="P11_23">23&#160;</span> Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever.
<span class="verse" id="P11_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For all flesh <span class='add'>is</span> as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and the flower thereof falleth away:
<span class="verse" id="P11_25">25&#160;</span> But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='P12_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P12_1">1&#160;</span> Wherefore laying aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>all evil speakings,
<span class="verse" id="P12_2">2&#160;</span> As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby:
<span class="verse" id="P12_3">3&#160;</span> If so be ye have tasted that the Lord <span class='add'>is</span> gracious.
<span class="verse" id="P12_4">4&#160;</span> To whom coming, <span class='add'>as unto</span> a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, <span class='add'>and</span> precious,
<span class="verse" id="P12_5">5&#160;</span> Ye also, as lively stones, <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="P12_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>also it is contained in the scripture, <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded.
<span class="verse" id="P12_7">7&#160;</span> Unto you therefore which believe <span class='add'>he is</span> <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>precious: but unto them which be disobedient, <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner,
<span class="verse" id="P12_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, <span class='add'>even to them</span> which stumble at the word, being disobedient: whereunto also they were appointed.
<span class="verse" id="P12_9">9&#160;</span> But ye <span class='add'>are</span> a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light:
<span class="verse" id="P12_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Which in time past <span class='add'>were</span> not a people, but <span class='add'>are</span> now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P12_11">11&#160;</span> Dearly beloved, I beseech <span class='add'>you</span> as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;
<span class="verse" id="P12_12">12&#160;</span> Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by <span class='add'>your</span> good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P12_13">13&#160;</span> Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme;
<span class="verse" id="P12_14">14&#160;</span> Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.
<span class="verse" id="P12_15">15&#160;</span> For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:
<span class="verse" id="P12_16">16&#160;</span> As free, and not <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>using <span class='add'>your</span> liberty for a cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
<span class="verse" id="P12_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Honour all <span class='add'>men</span>. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honour the king.
<span class="verse" id="P12_18">18&#160;</span> Servants, <span class='add'>be</span> subject to <span class='add'>your</span> masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.
<span class="verse" id="P12_19">19&#160;</span> For this <span class='add'>is</span> thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.
<span class="verse" id="P12_20">20&#160;</span> For what glory <span class='add'>is it</span>, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, and suffer <span class='add'>for it</span>, ye take it patiently, this <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>acceptable with God.
<span class="verse" id="P12_21">21&#160;</span> For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ also suffered <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps:
<span class="verse" id="P12_22">22&#160;</span> Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth:
<span class="verse" id="P12_23">23&#160;</span> Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>committed <span class='add'>himself</span> to him that judgeth righteously:
<span class="verse" id="P12_24">24&#160;</span> Who his own self bare our sins in his own body <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed.
<span class="verse" id="P12_25">25&#160;</span> For ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='P13_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P13_1">1&#160;</span> Likewise, ye wives, <span class='add'>be</span> in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives;
<span class="verse" id="P13_2">2&#160;</span> While they behold your chaste conversation <span class='add'>coupled</span> with fear.
<span class="verse" id="P13_3">3&#160;</span> Whose adorning let it not be that outward <span class='add'>adorning</span> of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel;
<span class="verse" id="P13_4">4&#160;</span> But <span class='add'>let it be</span> the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, <span class='add'>even the ornament</span> of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.
<span class="verse" id="P13_5">5&#160;</span> For after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands:
<span class="verse" id="P13_6">6&#160;</span> Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him lord: whose <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.
<span class="verse" id="P13_7">7&#160;</span> Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with <span class='add'>them</span> according to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered.
<span class="verse" id="P13_8">8&#160;</span> Finally, <span class='add'>be ye</span> all of one mind, having compassion one of another, <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>love as brethren, <span class='add'>be</span> pitiful, <span class='add'>be</span> courteous:
<span class="verse" id="P13_9">9&#160;</span> Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a blessing.
<span class="verse" id="P13_10">10&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile:
<span class="verse" id="P13_11">11&#160;</span> Let him eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it.
<span class="verse" id="P13_12">12&#160;</span> For the eyes of the Lord <span class='add'>are</span> over the righteous, and his ears <span class='add'>are open</span> unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>against them that do evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P13_13">13&#160;</span> And who <span class='add'>is</span> he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?
<span class="verse" id="P13_14">14&#160;</span> But and if ye suffer for righteousness’ sake, happy <span class='add'>are ye</span>: and <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;
<span class="verse" id="P13_15">15&#160;</span> But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and <span class='add'>be</span> ready always to <span class='add'>give</span> an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fear:
<span class="verse" id="P13_16">16&#160;</span> Having a good conscience; that, whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.
<span class="verse" id="P13_17">17&#160;</span> For <span class='add'>it is</span> better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing, than for evil doing.
<span class="verse" id="P13_18">18&#160;</span> For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit:
<span class="verse" id="P13_19">19&#160;</span> By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;
<span class="verse" id="P13_20">20&#160;</span> Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water.
<span class="verse" id="P13_21">21&#160;</span> The like figure whereunto <span class='add'>even</span> baptism doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God,) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ:
<span class="verse" id="P13_22">22&#160;</span> Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='P14_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P14_1">1&#160;</span> Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;
<span class="verse" id="P14_2">2&#160;</span> That he no longer should live the rest of <span class='add'>his</span> time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.
<span class="verse" id="P14_3">3&#160;</span> For the time past of <span class='add'>our</span> life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries:
<span class="verse" id="P14_4">4&#160;</span> Wherein they think it strange that ye run not with <span class='add'>them</span> to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of <span class='add'>you</span>:
<span class="verse" id="P14_5">5&#160;</span> Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.
<span class="verse" id="P14_6">6&#160;</span> For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P14_7">7&#160;</span> But the end of all things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.
<span class="verse" id="P14_8">8&#160;</span> And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for charity <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall cover the multitude of sins.
<span class="verse" id="P14_9">9&#160;</span> Use hospitality one to another without grudging.
<span class="verse" id="P14_10">10&#160;</span> As every man hath received the gift, <span class='add'>even so</span> minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
<span class="verse" id="P14_11">11&#160;</span> If any man speak, <span class='add'>let him speak</span> as the oracles of God; if any man minister, <span class='add'>let him do it</span> as of the ability which God giveth: that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P14_12">12&#160;</span> Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you:
<span class="verse" id="P14_13">13&#160;</span> But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.
<span class="verse" id="P14_14">14&#160;</span> If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy <span class='add'>are ye</span>; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified.
<span class="verse" id="P14_15">15&#160;</span> But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or <span class='add'>as</span> a thief, or <span class='add'>as</span> an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men’s matters.
<span class="verse" id="P14_16">16&#160;</span> Yet if <span class='add'>any man suffer</span> as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf.
<span class="verse" id="P14_17">17&#160;</span> For the time <span class='add'>is come</span> that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if <span class='add'>it</span> first <span class='add'>begin</span> at us, what shall the end <span class='add'>be</span> of them that obey not the gospel of God?
<span class="verse" id="P14_18">18&#160;</span> And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?
<span class="verse" id="P14_19">19&#160;</span> Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls <span class='add'>to him</span> in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='P15_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P15_1">1&#160;</span> The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed:
<span class="verse" id="P15_2">2&#160;</span> Feed the flock of God <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>which is among you, taking the oversight <span class='add'>thereof</span>, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;
<span class="verse" id="P15_3">3&#160;</span> Neither as <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>being lords over <span class='add'>God’s</span> heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.
<span class="verse" id="P15_4">4&#160;</span> And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.
<span class="verse" id="P15_5">5&#160;</span> Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all <span class='add'>of you</span> be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P15_6">6&#160;</span> Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time:
<span class="verse" id="P15_7">7&#160;</span> Casting all your care upon him; for he careth for you.
<span class="verse" id="P15_8">8&#160;</span> Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour:
<span class="verse" id="P15_9">9&#160;</span> Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.
<span class="verse" id="P15_10">10&#160;</span> But the God of all grace, who hath called us <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle <span class='add'>you</span>.
<span class="verse" id="P15_11">11&#160;</span> To him <span class='add'>be</span> glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="P15_12">12&#160;</span> By Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand.
<span class="verse" id="P15_13">13&#160;</span> The <span class='add'>church that is</span> at Babylon, elected together with <span class='add'>you</span>, saluteth you; and <span class='add'>so doth</span> Marcus my son.
<span class="verse" id="P15_14">14&#160;</span> Greet ye one another with a kiss of charity. Peace <span class='add'>be</span> with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P11_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">much.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P11_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">for us.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P11_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">perfectly.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV11_44'>11. 44</a>. &amp; <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_2'>19. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_7'>20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P11_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">For that.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> all]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">be ye built.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 sacrifice]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> also]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_16'>28. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">an honour.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_22'>118. 22</a> Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_42'>21. 42</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC4_11'>4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_14'>8. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">a purchased people.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">virtues.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">wherein.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">having.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">Esteem.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">thank.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Some read, <span class="add">for you.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">committed</span> his cause.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P12_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P13_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">children.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P13_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">loving to the brethren.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P13_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_12'>34. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P13_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">upon.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P13_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. 8. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_12'>12</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P13_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">reverence.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P14_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">will.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P15_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">as much as in you is.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P15_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">overruling.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#P15_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 into]</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
