<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE 1 Samuel 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Samuel</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S15_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S16_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S18_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S19_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S110_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S111_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S112_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S113_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S118_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S119_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S120_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S121_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S122_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S123_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S124_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S125_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S126_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S127_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S129_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S130_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S131_0'>31</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='S10_0'>

<div class='mt'>The First Book of Samuel Otherwise Called the First Book of the Kings  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S11_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="S11_1">1&#160;</span> Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name <span class='add'>was</span> Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite:
<span class="verse" id="S11_2">2&#160;</span> And he had two wives; the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah: and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
<span class="verse" id="S11_3">3&#160;</span> And this man went up out of his city <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>yearly to worship and to sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>were</span> there.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions:
<span class="verse" id="S11_5">5&#160;</span> But unto Hannah he gave <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had shut up her womb.
<span class="verse" id="S11_6">6&#160;</span> And her adversary also <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>provoked her sore, for to make her fret, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had shut up her womb.
<span class="verse" id="S11_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as</span> he did so year by year, <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when she went up to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat.
<span class="verse" id="S11_8">8&#160;</span> Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? <span class='add'>am</span> not I better to thee than ten sons? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_9">9&#160;</span>¶ So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S11_10">10&#160;</span>And she <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and wept sore.
<span class="verse" id="S11_11">11&#160;</span> And she vowed a vow, and said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, if thou wilt indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a man child, then I will give him unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all the days of his life, and <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>there shall no razor come upon his head.
<span class="verse" id="S11_12">12&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as she <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continued praying before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that Eli marked her mouth.
<span class="verse" id="S11_13">13&#160;</span> Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken.
<span class="verse" id="S11_14">14&#160;</span> And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thee.
<span class="verse" id="S11_15">15&#160;</span> And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I <span class='add'>am</span> a woman <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S11_16">16&#160;</span> Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto.
<span class="verse" id="S11_17">17&#160;</span> Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant <span class='add'>thee</span> thy petition that thou hast asked of him.
<span class="verse" id="S11_18">18&#160;</span> And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more <span class='add'>sad</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> remembered her.
<span class="verse" id="S11_20">20&#160;</span> Wherefore it came to pass, when <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the time was come about after Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Samuel, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Because I have asked him of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S11_21">21&#160;</span> And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.
<span class="verse" id="S11_22">22&#160;</span> But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, <span class='add'>I will not go up</span> until the child be weaned, and <span class='add'>then</span> I will bring him, that he may appear before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and there abide for ever.
<span class="verse" id="S11_23">23&#160;</span> And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good; tarry until thou have weaned him; only the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> establish his word. So the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought him unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Shiloh: and the child <span class='add'>was</span> young.
<span class="verse" id="S11_25">25&#160;</span> And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli.
<span class="verse" id="S11_26">26&#160;</span> And she said, Oh my lord, <span class='add'>as</span> thy soul liveth, my lord, I <span class='add'>am</span> the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S11_27">27&#160;</span> For this child I prayed; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given me my petition which I asked of him:
<span class="verse" id="S11_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore also I have <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lent him to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as long as he liveth <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he shall be lent to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And he worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> there.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S12_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_1">1&#160;</span> And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, mine horn is exalted in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because I rejoice in thy salvation.
<span class="verse" id="S12_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> none holy as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for <span class='add'>there is</span> none beside thee: neither <span class='add'>is there</span> any rock like our God.
<span class="verse" id="S12_3">3&#160;</span> Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let <span class='add'>not</span> <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.
<span class="verse" id="S12_4">4&#160;</span> The bows of the mighty men <span class='add'>are</span> broken, and they that stumbled are girded with strength.
<span class="verse" id="S12_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They that were</span> full have hired out themselves for bread; and <span class='add'>they that were</span> hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she that hath many children is waxed feeble.
<span class="verse" id="S12_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up.
<span class="verse" id="S12_7">7&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth up.
<span class="verse" id="S12_8">8&#160;</span> He <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>raiseth up the poor out of the dust, <span class='add'>and</span> lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set <span class='add'>them</span> among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth <span class='add'>are</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>, and he hath set the world upon them.
<span class="verse" id="S12_9">9&#160;</span> He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail.
<span class="verse" id="S12_10">10&#160;</span> The adversaries of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be broken to pieces; <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>out of heaven shall he thunder upon them: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall judge the ends of the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_11">11&#160;</span> And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before Eli the priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Now the sons of Eli <span class='add'>were</span> sons of Belial; they knew not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S12_13">13&#160;</span> And the priests’ custom with the people <span class='add'>was, that</span>, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest’s servant came, while the flesh was in seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand;
<span class="verse" id="S12_14">14&#160;</span> And he struck <span class='add'>it</span> into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.
<span class="verse" id="S12_15">15&#160;</span> Also before they burnt the fat, the priest’s servant came, and said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw.
<span class="verse" id="S12_16">16&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>if</span> any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>presently, and <span class='add'>then</span> take <span class='add'>as much</span> as thy soul desireth; then he would answer him, <span class='add'>Nay;</span> but thou shalt give <span class='add'>it me</span> now: and if not, I will take <span class='add'>it</span> by force.
<span class="verse" id="S12_17">17&#160;</span> Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for men abhorred the offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_18">18&#160;</span>¶ But Samuel ministered before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>being</span> a child, <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>girded with a linen ephod.
<span class="verse" id="S12_19">19&#160;</span> Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> give thee seed of this woman for the <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>loan which is lent to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And they went unto their own home.
<span class="verse" id="S12_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all Israel; and how they lay with the women that <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>assembled <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="S12_23">23&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I hear of your evil dealings by all this people.
<span class="verse" id="S12_24">24&#160;</span> Nay, my sons; for <span class='add'>it is</span> no good report that I hear: ye make the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> people <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to transgress.
<span class="verse" id="S12_25">25&#160;</span> If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> would slay them.
<span class="verse" id="S12_26">26&#160;</span> And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and also with men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh’s house?
<span class="verse" id="S12_28">28&#160;</span> And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel <span class='add'>to be</span> my priest, to offer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>did I give unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="S12_29">29&#160;</span> Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine offering, which I have commanded <span class='add'>in my</span> habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the offerings of Israel my people?
<span class="verse" id="S12_30">30&#160;</span> Wherefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel saith, I said indeed <span class='add'>that</span> thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: but now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
<span class="verse" id="S12_31">31&#160;</span> Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father’s house, that there shall not be an old man in thine house.
<span class="verse" id="S12_32">32&#160;</span> And thou shalt see <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an enemy <span class='add'>in my</span> habitation, in all <span class='add'>the wealth</span> which <span class='add'>God</span> shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in thine house for ever.
<span class="verse" id="S12_33">33&#160;</span> And the man of thine, <span class='add'>whom</span> I shall not cut off from mine altar, <span class='add'>shall be</span> to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the increase of thine house shall die <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the flower of their age.
<span class="verse" id="S12_34">34&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them.
<span class="verse" id="S12_35">35&#160;</span> And I will raise me up a faithful priest, <span class='add'>that</span> shall do according to <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.
<span class="verse" id="S12_36">36&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> every one that is left in thine house shall come <span class='add'>and</span> crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shall say, <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Put me, I pray thee, into <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>one of the priests’ offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S13_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_1">1&#160;</span> And the child Samuel ministered unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before Eli. And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was precious in those days; <span class='add'>there was</span> no open vision.
<span class="verse" id="S13_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass at that time, when Eli <span class='add'>was</span> laid down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim, <span class='add'>that</span> he could not see;
<span class="verse" id="S13_3">3&#160;</span> And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, where the ark of God <span class='add'>was</span>, and Samuel was laid down <span class='add'>to sleep;</span>
<span class="verse" id="S13_4">4&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called Samuel: and he answered, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="S13_5">5&#160;</span> And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down.
<span class="verse" id="S13_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I; for thou didst call me. And he answered, I called not, my son; lie down again.
<span class="verse" id="S13_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Now Samuel did not yet know the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither was the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> yet revealed unto him.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="S13_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I; for thou didst call me. And Eli perceived that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had called the child.
<span class="verse" id="S13_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for thy servant heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
<span class="verse" id="S13_10">10&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>every one that heareth it shall tingle.
<span class="verse" id="S13_12">12&#160;</span> In that day I will perform against Eli all <span class='add'>things</span> which I have spoken concerning his house: <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when I begin, I will also make an end.
<span class="verse" id="S13_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>vile, and he <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>restrained them not.
<span class="verse" id="S13_14">14&#160;</span> And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision.
<span class="verse" id="S13_16">16&#160;</span> Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="S13_17">17&#160;</span> And he said, What <span class='add'>is</span> the thing that <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> hath said unto thee? I pray thee hide <span class='add'>it</span> not from me: God do so to thee, and <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>more also, if thou hide <span class='add'>any</span> <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="S13_18">18&#160;</span> And Samuel told him <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: let him do what seemeth him good.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel grew, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with him, and did let none of his words fall to the ground.
<span class="verse" id="S13_20">20&#160;</span> And all Israel from Dan even to Beer-sheba knew that Samuel <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>established  <span class='add'>to be</span> a prophet of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S13_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared again in Shiloh: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S14_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of Samuel <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Eben-ezer: and the Philistines pitched in Aphek.
<span class="verse" id="S14_2">2&#160;</span> And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and when <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines: and they slew of <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the army in the field about four thousand men.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Wherefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smitten us to day before the Philistines? Let us <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fetch the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> out of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies.
<span class="verse" id="S14_4">4&#160;</span> So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, which dwelleth <span class='add'>between</span> the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, <span class='add'>were</span> there with the ark of the covenant of God.
<span class="verse" id="S14_5">5&#160;</span> And when the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.
<span class="verse" id="S14_6">6&#160;</span> And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What <span class='add'>meaneth</span> the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was come into the camp.
<span class="verse" id="S14_7">7&#160;</span> And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a thing <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heretofore.
<span class="verse" id="S14_8">8&#160;</span> Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these <span class='add'>are</span> the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="S14_9">9&#160;</span> Be strong, and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrews, <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as they have been to you: <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>quit yourselves like men, and fight.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
<span class="verse" id="S14_11">11&#160;</span> And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were slain.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head.
<span class="verse" id="S14_13">13&#160;</span> And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told <span class='add'>it</span>, all the city cried out.
<span class="verse" id="S14_14">14&#160;</span> And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What <span class='add'>meaneth</span> the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli.
<span class="verse" id="S14_15">15&#160;</span> Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his eyes <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were dim, that he could not see.
<span class="verse" id="S14_16">16&#160;</span> And the man said unto Eli, I <span class='add'>am</span> he that came out of the army, and I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is there done, my son?
<span class="verse" id="S14_17">17&#160;</span> And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.
<span class="verse" id="S14_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And his daughter in law, Phinehas’ wife, was with child, <span class='add'>near</span> <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and travailed; for her pains <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>came upon her.
<span class="verse" id="S14_20">20&#160;</span> And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not, <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>neither did she regard <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S14_21">21&#160;</span> And she named the child <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I-chabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband.
<span class="verse" id="S14_22">22&#160;</span> And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of God is taken.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S15_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S15_1">1&#160;</span> And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from Eben-ezer unto Ashdod.
<span class="verse" id="S15_2">2&#160;</span> When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S15_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon <span class='add'>was</span> fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.
<span class="verse" id="S15_4">4&#160;</span> And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon <span class='add'>was</span> fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands <span class='add'>were</span> cut off upon the threshold; only <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>the stump of</span> Dagon was left to him.
<span class="verse" id="S15_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon’s house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S15_6">6&#160;</span> But the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>emerods, <span class='add'>even</span> Ashdod and the coasts thereof.
<span class="verse" id="S15_7">7&#160;</span> And when the men of Ashdod saw that <span class='add'>it was</span> so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god.
<span class="verse" id="S15_8">8&#160;</span> They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about <span class='add'>thither</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S15_9">9&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was against the city with a very great destruction: and he smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods in their secret parts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S15_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our people.
<span class="verse" id="S15_11">11&#160;</span> So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.
<span class="verse" id="S15_12">12&#160;</span> And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the cry of the city went up to heaven.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S16_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_1">1&#160;</span> And the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was in the country of the Philistines seven months.
<span class="verse" id="S16_2">2&#160;</span> And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, What shall we do to the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place.
<span class="verse" id="S16_3">3&#160;</span> And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.
<span class="verse" id="S16_4">4&#160;</span> Then said they, What <span class='add'>shall be</span> the trespass offering which we shall return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, <span class='add'>according to</span> the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague <span class='add'>was</span> on <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>you all, and on your lords.
<span class="verse" id="S16_5">5&#160;</span> Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.
<span class="verse" id="S16_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wonderfully among them, <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>did they not let <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the people go, and they departed?
<span class="verse" id="S16_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>their calves home from them:
<span class="verse" id="S16_8">8&#160;</span> And take the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him <span class='add'>for</span> a trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go.
<span class="verse" id="S16_9">9&#160;</span> And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Beth-shemesh, <span class='add'>then</span> <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know that <span class='add'>it is</span> not his hand <span class='add'>that</span> smote us; it <span class='add'>was</span> a chance <span class='add'>that</span> happened to us.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home:
<span class="verse" id="S16_11">11&#160;</span> And they laid the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods.
<span class="verse" id="S16_12">12&#160;</span> And the kine took the straight way to the way of Beth-shemesh, <span class='add'>and</span> went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside <span class='add'>to</span> the right hand or <span class='add'>to</span> the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of Beth-shemesh.
<span class="verse" id="S16_13">13&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>they of</span> Beth-shemesh <span class='add'>were</span> reaping their wheat harvest in the valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S16_14">14&#160;</span> And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Beth-shemite, and stood there, where <span class='add'>there was</span> a great stone: and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S16_15">15&#160;</span> And the Levites took down the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the coffer that <span class='add'>was</span> with it, wherein the jewels of gold <span class='add'>were</span>, and put <span class='add'>them</span> on the great stone: and the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S16_16">16&#160;</span> And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen <span class='add'>it</span>, they returned to Ekron the same day.
<span class="verse" id="S16_17">17&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the golden emerods which the Philistines returned <span class='add'>for</span> a trespass offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;
<span class="verse" id="S16_18">18&#160;</span> And the golden mice, <span class='add'>according to</span> the number of all the cities of the Philistines <span class='add'>belonging</span> to the five lords, <span class='add'>both</span> of fenced cities, and of country villages, even unto the <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>great <span class='add'>stone of</span> Abel, whereon they set down the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>which stone remaineth</span> unto this day in the field of Joshua, the Beth-shemite.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And he smote the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had looked into the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had smitten <span class='add'>many</span> of the people with a great slaughter.
<span class="verse" id="S16_20">20&#160;</span> And the men of Beth-shemesh said, Who is able to stand before this holy <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God? and to whom shall he go up from us? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjath-jearim, saying, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; come ye down, <span class='add'>and</span> fetch it up to you.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S17_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_1">1&#160;</span> And the men of Kirjath-jearim came, and fetched up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S17_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjath-jearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel lamented after the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with all your hearts, <span class='add'>then</span> <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>put away the strange gods and <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S17_4">4&#160;</span> Then the children of Israel did put away <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> only.
<span class="verse" id="S17_5">5&#160;</span> And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S17_6">6&#160;</span> And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured <span class='add'>it</span> out before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_7">7&#160;</span> And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they were afraid of the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S17_8">8&#160;</span> And the children of Israel said to Samuel, <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Cease not to cry unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered <span class='add'>it for</span> a burnt offering wholly unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and Samuel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for Israel; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>heard him.
<span class="verse" id="S17_10">10&#160;</span> And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smitten before Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S17_11">11&#160;</span> And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until <span class='add'>they came</span> under Beth-car.
<span class="verse" id="S17_12">12&#160;</span> Then Samuel took a stone, and set <span class='add'>it</span> between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Eben-ezer, saying, Hitherto hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> helped us.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_13">13&#160;</span>¶ So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel: and the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
<span class="verse" id="S17_14">14&#160;</span> And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.
<span class="verse" id="S17_15">15&#160;</span> And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
<span class="verse" id="S17_16">16&#160;</span> And he went from year to year <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places.
<span class="verse" id="S17_17">17&#160;</span> And his return <span class='add'>was</span> to Ramah; for there <span class='add'>was</span> his house; and there he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S18_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S18_2">2&#160;</span> Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his second, Abiah: <span class='add'>they were</span> judges in Beer-sheba.
<span class="verse" id="S18_3">3&#160;</span> And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>took bribes, and perverted judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_4">4&#160;</span> Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah,
<span class="verse" id="S18_5">5&#160;</span> And said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>make us a king to judge us like all the nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_6">6&#160;</span>¶ But the thing <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S18_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.
<span class="verse" id="S18_8">8&#160;</span> According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="S18_9">9&#160;</span> Now therefore <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hearken unto their voice: <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall reign over them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel told all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the people that asked of him a king.
<span class="verse" id="S18_11">11&#160;</span> And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign over you: He will take your sons, and appoint <span class='add'>them</span> for himself, for his chariots, and <span class='add'>to be</span> his horsemen; and <span class='add'>some</span> shall run before his chariots.
<span class="verse" id="S18_12">12&#160;</span> And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and <span class='add'>will set them</span> to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots.
<span class="verse" id="S18_13">13&#160;</span> And he will take your daughters <span class='add'>to be</span> confectionaries, and <span class='add'>to be</span> cooks, and <span class='add'>to be</span> bakers.
<span class="verse" id="S18_14">14&#160;</span> And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, <span class='add'>even</span> the best <span class='add'>of them</span>, and give <span class='add'>them</span> to his servants.
<span class="verse" id="S18_15">15&#160;</span> And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>officers, and to his servants.
<span class="verse" id="S18_16">16&#160;</span> And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put <span class='add'>them</span> to his work.
<span class="verse" id="S18_17">17&#160;</span> He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his servants.
<span class="verse" id="S18_18">18&#160;</span> And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen you; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not hear you in that day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us;
<span class="verse" id="S18_20">20&#160;</span> That we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.
<span class="verse" id="S18_21">21&#160;</span> And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S18_22">22&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto his city.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S19_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_1">1&#160;</span> Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a Benjamite, a mighty man of <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>power.
<span class="verse" id="S19_2">2&#160;</span> And he had a son, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Saul, a choice young man, and a goodly: and <span class='add'>there was</span> not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward <span class='add'>he was</span> higher than any of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_3">3&#160;</span> And the asses of Kish Saul’s father were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses.
<span class="verse" id="S19_4">4&#160;</span> And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalisha, but they found <span class='add'>them</span> not: then they passed through the land of Shalim, and <span class='add'>there they were</span> not: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found <span class='add'>them</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="S19_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that <span class='add'>was</span> with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave <span class='add'>caring</span> for the asses, and take thought for us.
<span class="verse" id="S19_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Behold now, <span class='add'>there is</span> in this city a man of God, and <span class='add'>he is</span> an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we should go.
<span class="verse" id="S19_7">7&#160;</span> Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> we go, what shall we bring the man? for the bread <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is spent in our vessels, and <span class='add'>there is</span> not a present to bring to the man of God: what <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have we?
<span class="verse" id="S19_8">8&#160;</span> And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I have here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: <span class='add'>that</span> will I give to the man of God, to tell us our way.
<span class="verse" id="S19_9">9&#160;</span>(Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for <span class='add'>he that is</span> now <span class='add'>called</span> a Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.)
<span class="verse" id="S19_10">10&#160;</span> Then said Saul to his servant, <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where the man of God <span class='add'>was</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> as they went up <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the hill to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here?
<span class="verse" id="S19_12">12&#160;</span> And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, <span class='add'>he is</span> before you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for <span class='add'>there is</span> a <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sacrifice of the people to day in the high place:
<span class="verse" id="S19_13">13&#160;</span> As soon as ye be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come, because he doth bless the sacrifice; <span class='add'>and</span> afterwards they eat that be bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>this time ye shall find him.
<span class="verse" id="S19_14">14&#160;</span> And they went up into the city: <span class='add'>and</span> when they were come into the city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_15">15&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came, saying,
<span class="verse" id="S19_16">16&#160;</span> To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him <span class='add'>to be</span> captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me.
<span class="verse" id="S19_17">17&#160;</span> And when Samuel saw Saul, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Behold the man whom I spake to thee of! this same shall <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>reign over my people.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_18">18&#160;</span> Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer’s house <span class='add'>is</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S19_19">19&#160;</span> And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I <span class='add'>am</span> the seer: go up before me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine heart.
<span class="verse" id="S19_20">20&#160;</span> And as for thine asses that were lost <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>three days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found. And on whom <span class='add'>is</span> all the desire of Israel? <span class='add'>Is it</span> not on thee, and on all thy father’s house?
<span class="verse" id="S19_21">21&#160;</span> And Saul answered and said, <span class='add'>Am</span> not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>so to me?
<span class="verse" id="S19_22">22&#160;</span> And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden, which <span class='add'>were</span> about thirty persons.
<span class="verse" id="S19_23">23&#160;</span> And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee.
<span class="verse" id="S19_24">24&#160;</span> And the cook took up the shoulder, and <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>was</span> upon it, and set <span class='add'>it</span> before Saul. And <span class='add'>Samuel</span> said, Behold that which is <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>left! set <span class='add'>it</span> before thee, <span class='add'>and</span> eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And when they were come down from the high place into the city, <span class='add'>Samuel</span> communed with Saul upon the top of the house.
<span class="verse" id="S19_26">26&#160;</span> And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.
<span class="verse" id="S19_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on,) but stand thou still <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a while, that I may shew thee the word of God.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S110_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_1">1&#160;</span> Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured <span class='add'>it</span> upon his head, and kissed him, and said, <span class='add'>Is it</span> not because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath anointed thee <span class='add'>to be</span> captain over his inheritance?
<span class="verse" id="S110_2">2&#160;</span> When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rachel’s sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
<span class="verse" id="S110_3">3&#160;</span> Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Beth-el, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
<span class="verse" id="S110_4">4&#160;</span> And they will <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>salute thee, and give thee two <span class='add'>loaves</span> of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hands.
<span class="verse" id="S110_5">5&#160;</span> After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where <span class='add'>is</span> the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy:
<span class="verse" id="S110_6">6&#160;</span> And the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man.
<span class="verse" id="S110_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>that</span> thou do as occasion serve thee; for God <span class='add'>is</span> with thee.
<span class="verse" id="S110_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, <span class='add'>and</span> to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>seven days shalt thou tarry, till I come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that when he had turned his <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>back to go from Samuel, God <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass that day.
<span class="verse" id="S110_10">10&#160;</span> And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them.
<span class="verse" id="S110_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>one to another, What <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> is come unto the son of Kish? <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>Is</span> Saul also among the prophets?
<span class="verse" id="S110_12">12&#160;</span> And one <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of the same place answered and said, But who <span class='add'>is</span> their father? Therefore it became a proverb, <span class='add'>Is</span> Saul also among the prophets?
<span class="verse" id="S110_13">13&#160;</span> And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Saul’s uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went ye? And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that <span class='add'>they were</span> no where, we came to Samuel.
<span class="verse" id="S110_15">15&#160;</span> And Saul’s uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto you.
<span class="verse" id="S110_16">16&#160;</span> And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told him not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel called the people together unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Mizpeh;
<span class="verse" id="S110_18">18&#160;</span> And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, <span class='add'>and</span> of them that oppressed you:
<span class="verse" id="S110_19">19&#160;</span> And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him, <span class='add'>Nay</span>, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by your tribes, and by your thousands.
<span class="verse" id="S110_20">20&#160;</span> And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
<span class="verse" id="S110_21">21&#160;</span> When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found.
<span class="verse" id="S110_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore they enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> further, if the man should yet come thither. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered, Behold, he hath hid himself among the stuff.
<span class="verse" id="S110_23">23&#160;</span> And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>his shoulders and upward.
<span class="verse" id="S110_24">24&#160;</span> And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath chosen, that <span class='add'>there is</span> none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>God save the king.
<span class="verse" id="S110_25">25&#160;</span> Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote <span class='add'>it</span> in a book, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> up before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched.
<span class="verse" id="S110_27">27&#160;</span> But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And they despised him, and brought him no presents. But <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he held his peace.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S111_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_1">1&#160;</span> Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabesh-gilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.
<span class="verse" id="S111_2">2&#160;</span> And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this <span class='add'>condition</span> will I make <span class='add'>a covenant</span> with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it <span class='add'>for</span> a reproach upon all Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S111_3">3&#160;</span> And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Give us seven days’ respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel: and then, if <span class='add'>there be</span> no man to save us, we will come out to thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices, and wept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_5">5&#160;</span> And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul said, What <span class='add'>aileth</span> the people that they weep? And they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh.
<span class="verse" id="S111_6">6&#160;</span> And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly.
<span class="verse" id="S111_7">7&#160;</span> And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent <span class='add'>them</span> throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fell on the people, and they came out <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with one consent.
<span class="verse" id="S111_8">8&#160;</span> And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.
<span class="verse" id="S111_9">9&#160;</span> And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say unto the men of Jabesh-gilead, To morrow, by <span class='add'>that time</span> the sun be hot, ye shall have <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>help. And the messengers came and shewed <span class='add'>it</span> to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.
<span class="verse" id="S111_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you.
<span class="verse" id="S111_11">11&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span> on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them were not left together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the people said unto Samuel, Who <span class='add'>is</span> he that said, Shall Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death.
<span class="verse" id="S111_13">13&#160;</span> And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day: for to day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath wrought salvation in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S111_14">14&#160;</span> Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.
<span class="verse" id="S111_15">15&#160;</span> And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace offerings before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S112_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_1">1&#160;</span> And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you.
<span class="verse" id="S112_2">2&#160;</span> And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and grayheaded; and, behold, my sons <span class='add'>are</span> with you: and I have walked before you from my childhood unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="S112_3">3&#160;</span>Behold, <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>here I <span class='add'>am:</span> witness against me before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received <span class='add'>any</span> <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bribe <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.
<span class="verse" id="S112_4">4&#160;</span> And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man’s hand.
<span class="verse" id="S112_5">5&#160;</span> And he said unto them, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> witness against you, and his anointed <span class='add'>is</span> witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, <span class='add'>He is</span> witness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel said unto the people, <span class='add'>It is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>advanced Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="S112_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of all the <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>righteous acts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he did <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to you and to your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="S112_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place.
<span class="verse" id="S112_9">9&#160;</span> And when they forgat the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.
<span class="verse" id="S112_10">10&#160;</span> And they cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, We have sinned, because we have forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.
<span class="verse" id="S112_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelled safe.
<span class="verse" id="S112_12">12&#160;</span> And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over us: when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>was</span> your king.
<span class="verse" id="S112_13">13&#160;</span> Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, <span class='add'>and</span> whom ye have desired! and, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath set a king over you.
<span class="verse" id="S112_14">14&#160;</span> If ye will fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel against the <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, then shall both ye and also the king that reigneth over you <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continue following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God:
<span class="verse" id="S112_15">15&#160;</span> But if ye will not obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but rebel against the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, then shall the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be against you, as <span class='add'>it was</span> against your fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will do before your eyes.
<span class="verse" id="S112_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it</span> not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your wickedness <span class='add'>is</span> great, which ye have done in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in asking you a king.
<span class="verse" id="S112_18">18&#160;</span> So Samuel called unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and Samuel.
<span class="verse" id="S112_19">19&#160;</span> And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins <span class='add'>this</span> evil, to ask us a king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with all your heart;
<span class="verse" id="S112_21">21&#160;</span> And turn ye not aside: for <span class='add'>then should ye go</span> after vain <span class='add'>things</span>, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they <span class='add'>are</span> vain.
<span class="verse" id="S112_22">22&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not forsake his people for his great name’s sake: because it hath pleased the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to make you his people.
<span class="verse" id="S112_23">23&#160;</span> Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the right way:
<span class="verse" id="S112_24">24&#160;</span> Only fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and serve him in truth with all your heart: for consider <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>how great <span class='add'>things</span> he hath done for you.
<span class="verse" id="S112_25">25&#160;</span> But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S113_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_1">1&#160;</span> Saul <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel,
<span class="verse" id="S113_2">2&#160;</span> Saul chose him three thousand <span class='add'>men</span> of Israel; <span class='add'>whereof</span> two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Beth-el, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.
<span class="verse" id="S113_3">3&#160;</span> And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that <span class='add'>was</span> in <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Geba, and the Philistines heard <span class='add'>of it</span>. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.
<span class="verse" id="S113_4">4&#160;</span> And all Israel heard say <span class='add'>that</span> Saul had smitten a garrison of the Philistines, and <span class='add'>that</span> Israel also <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which <span class='add'>is</span> on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Beth-aven.
<span class="verse" id="S113_6">6&#160;</span> When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits.
<span class="verse" id="S113_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>some of</span> the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul, he <span class='add'>was</span> yet in Gilgal, and all the people <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>followed him trembling.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_8">8&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel <span class='add'>had appointed:</span> but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.
<span class="verse" id="S113_9">9&#160;</span> And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.
<span class="verse" id="S113_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>salute him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and <span class='add'>that</span> thou camest not within the days appointed, and <span class='add'>that</span> the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash;
<span class="verse" id="S113_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore said I, The Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made supplication unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt offering.
<span class="verse" id="S113_13">13&#160;</span> And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not kept the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever.
<span class="verse" id="S113_14">14&#160;</span> But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded him <span class='add'>to be</span> captain over his people, because thou hast not kept <span class='add'>that</span> which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_15">15&#160;</span> And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people <span class='add'>that were</span> <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>present with him, about six hundred men.
<span class="verse" id="S113_16">16&#160;</span> And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people <span class='add'>that were</span> present with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped in Michmash.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned unto the way <span class='add'>that leadeth to</span> Ophrah, unto the land of Shual:
<span class="verse" id="S113_18">18&#160;</span> And another company turned the way <span class='add'>to</span> Beth-horon: and another company turned <span class='add'>to</span> the way of the border that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel: for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make <span class='add'>them</span> swords or spears:
<span class="verse" id="S113_20">20&#160;</span> But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.
<span class="verse" id="S113_21">21&#160;</span> Yet they had <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to sharpen the goads.
<span class="verse" id="S113_22">22&#160;</span> So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found.
<span class="verse" id="S113_23">23&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of Michmash.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S114_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_1">1&#160;</span> Now <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over to the Philistines’ garrison, that <span class='add'>is</span> on the other side. But he told not his father.
<span class="verse" id="S114_2">2&#160;</span> And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a pomegranate tree which <span class='add'>is</span> in Migron: and the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him <span class='add'>were</span> about six hundred men;
<span class="verse" id="S114_3">3&#160;</span> And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I-chabod’s brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines’ garrison, <span class='add'>there was</span> a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
<span class="verse" id="S114_5">5&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>forefront of the one <span class='add'>was</span> situate northward over against Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah.
<span class="verse" id="S114_6">6&#160;</span> And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will work for us: for <span class='add'>there is</span> no restraint to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to save by many or by few.
<span class="verse" id="S114_7">7&#160;</span> And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine heart: turn thee; behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee according to thy heart.
<span class="verse" id="S114_8">8&#160;</span> Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto <span class='add'>these</span> men, and we will discover ourselves unto them.
<span class="verse" id="S114_9">9&#160;</span> If they say thus unto us, <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Tarry until we come to you; then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them.
<span class="verse" id="S114_10">10&#160;</span> But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered them into our hand: and this <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sign unto us.
<span class="verse" id="S114_11">11&#160;</span> And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.
<span class="verse" id="S114_12">12&#160;</span> And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered them into the hand of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S114_13">13&#160;</span> And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his armourbearer slew after him.
<span class="verse" id="S114_14">14&#160;</span> And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an half acre of land, <span class='add'>which</span> a yoke <span class='add'>of oxen might plow</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S114_15">15&#160;</span> And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it was <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a very great trembling.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_16">16&#160;</span> And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down <span class='add'>one another</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S114_17">17&#160;</span> Then said Saul unto the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, Number now, and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armourbearer <span class='add'>were</span> not <span class='add'>there</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S114_18">18&#160;</span> And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>noise that <span class='add'>was</span> in the host of the Philistines went on and increased: and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="S114_20">20&#160;</span> And Saul and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>assembled themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>every man’s sword was against his fellow, <span class='add'>and there was</span> a very great discomfiture.
<span class="verse" id="S114_21">21&#160;</span> Moreover the Hebrews <span class='add'>that</span> were with the Philistines before that time, which went up with them into the camp <span class='add'>from the country</span> round about, even they also <span class='add'>turned</span> to be with the Israelites that <span class='add'>were</span> with Saul and Jonathan.
<span class="verse" id="S114_22">22&#160;</span> Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount Ephraim, <span class='add'>when</span> they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle.
<span class="verse" id="S114_23">23&#160;</span> So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over unto Beth-aven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man that eateth <span class='add'>any</span> food until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted <span class='add'>any</span> food.
<span class="verse" id="S114_25">25&#160;</span>And all <span class='add'>they of</span> the land came to a wood; and there was honey upon the ground.
<span class="verse" id="S114_26">26&#160;</span> And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oath.
<span class="verse" id="S114_27">27&#160;</span> But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that <span class='add'>was</span> in his hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.
<span class="verse" id="S114_28">28&#160;</span> Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man that eateth <span class='add'>any</span> food this day. And the people were <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>faint.
<span class="verse" id="S114_29">29&#160;</span> Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey.
<span class="verse" id="S114_30">30&#160;</span> How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines?
<span class="verse" id="S114_31">31&#160;</span> And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were very faint.
<span class="verse" id="S114_32">32&#160;</span> And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and slew <span class='add'>them</span> on the ground: and the people did eat <span class='add'>them</span> <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with the blood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day.
<span class="verse" id="S114_34">34&#160;</span> And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and slay <span class='add'>them</span> here, and eat; and sin not against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in eating with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with him that night, and slew <span class='add'>them</span> there.
<span class="verse" id="S114_35">35&#160;</span> And Saul built an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the same was the first altar that he built unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God.
<span class="verse" id="S114_37">37&#160;</span> And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he answered him not that day.
<span class="verse" id="S114_38">38&#160;</span> And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>chief of the people: and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day.
<span class="verse" id="S114_39">39&#160;</span>For, <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But <span class='add'>there was</span> not a man among all the people <span class='add'>that</span> answered him.
<span class="verse" id="S114_40">40&#160;</span> Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="S114_41">41&#160;</span> Therefore Saul said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Give a perfect <span class='add'>lot</span>. And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>escaped.
<span class="verse" id="S114_42">42&#160;</span> And Saul said, Cast <span class='add'>lots</span> between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.
<span class="verse" id="S114_43">43&#160;</span> Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the end of the rod that <span class='add'>was</span> in mine hand, <span class='add'>and</span>, lo, I must die.
<span class="verse" id="S114_44">44&#160;</span> And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely die, Jonathan.
<span class="verse" id="S114_45">45&#160;</span> And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not.
<span class="verse" id="S114_46">46&#160;</span> Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the Philistines went to their own place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_47">47&#160;</span>¶ So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S114_48">48&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them.
<span class="verse" id="S114_49">49&#160;</span> Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchi-shua: and the names of his two daughters <span class='add'>were these;</span> the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:
<span class="verse" id="S114_50">50&#160;</span> And the name of Saul’s wife <span class='add'>was</span> Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name of the captain of his host <span class='add'>was</span> Abner, the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle.
<span class="verse" id="S114_51">51&#160;</span> And Kish <span class='add'>was</span> the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner <span class='add'>was</span> the son of Abiel.
<span class="verse" id="S114_52">52&#160;</span> And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S115_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_1">1&#160;</span> Samuel also said unto Saul, <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent me to anoint thee <span class='add'>to be</span> king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S115_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, I remember <span class='add'>that</span> which Amalek did to Israel, <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>how he laid <span class='add'>wait</span> for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="S115_3">3&#160;</span> Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.
<span class="verse" id="S115_4">4&#160;</span> And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="S115_5">5&#160;</span> And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>laid wait in the valley.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.
<span class="verse" id="S115_7">7&#160;</span> And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah <span class='add'>until</span> thou comest to Shur, that <span class='add'>is</span> over against Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="S115_8">8&#160;</span> And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="S115_9">9&#160;</span> But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all <span class='add'>that was</span> good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing <span class='add'>that was</span> vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Samuel, saying,
<span class="verse" id="S115_11">11&#160;</span> It repenteth me that I have set up Saul <span class='add'>to be</span> king: for he is turned back from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all night.
<span class="verse" id="S115_12">12&#160;</span> And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal.
<span class="verse" id="S115_13">13&#160;</span> And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> thou of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: I have performed the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S115_14">14&#160;</span> And Samuel said, What <span class='add'>meaneth</span> then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
<span class="verse" id="S115_15">15&#160;</span> And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="S115_16">16&#160;</span> Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on.
<span class="verse" id="S115_17">17&#160;</span> And Samuel said, When thou <span class='add'>wast</span> little in thine own sight, <span class='add'>wast</span> thou not <span class='add'>made</span> the head of the tribes of Israel, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> anointed thee king over Israel?
<span class="verse" id="S115_18">18&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent thee on a journey, and said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they be consumed.
<span class="verse" id="S115_19">19&#160;</span> Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="S115_20">20&#160;</span> And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have gone the way which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.
<span class="verse" id="S115_21">21&#160;</span> But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in Gilgal.
<span class="verse" id="S115_22">22&#160;</span> And Samuel said, Hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>as great</span> delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? Behold, <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to obey <span class='add'>is</span> better than sacrifice, <span class='add'>and</span> to hearken than the fat of rams.
<span class="verse" id="S115_23">23&#160;</span> For rebellion <span class='add'>is as</span> the sin of <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>witchcraft, and stubbornness <span class='add'>is as</span> iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he hath also rejected thee from <span class='add'>being</span> king.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have transgressed the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thy words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.
<span class="verse" id="S115_25">25&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S115_26">26&#160;</span> And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou hast rejected the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath rejected thee from being king over Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S115_27">27&#160;</span> And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent.
<span class="verse" id="S115_28">28&#160;</span> And Samuel said unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, <span class='add'>that is</span> better than thou.
<span class="verse" id="S115_29">29&#160;</span> And also the <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he <span class='add'>is</span> not a man, that he should repent.
<span class="verse" id="S115_30">30&#160;</span> Then he said, I have sinned: <span class='add'>yet</span> honour me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="S115_31">31&#160;</span> So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past.
<span class="verse" id="S115_33">33&#160;</span> And Samuel said, <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Gilgal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_34">34&#160;</span>¶ Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.
<span class="verse" id="S115_35">35&#160;</span> And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death: nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> repented that he had made Saul king over Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S116_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Beth-lehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons.
<span class="verse" id="S116_2">2&#160;</span> And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear <span class='add'>it</span>, he will kill me. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Take an heifer <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S116_3">3&#160;</span> And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me <span class='add'>him</span> whom I name unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="S116_4">4&#160;</span> And Samuel did that which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake, and came to Beth-lehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably?
<span class="verse" id="S116_5">5&#160;</span> And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed <span class='add'>is</span> before him.
<span class="verse" id="S116_7">7&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>Lord</span> seeth</span> not as man seeth; for man looketh on the <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>outward appearance, but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> looketh on the <a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heart.
<span class="verse" id="S116_8">8&#160;</span> Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> chosen this.
<span class="verse" id="S116_9">9&#160;</span> Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> chosen this.
<span class="verse" id="S116_10">10&#160;</span> Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jesse, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not chosen these.
<span class="verse" id="S116_11">11&#160;</span> And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all <span class='add'>thy</span> children? And he said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Send and fetch him: for we will not sit <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>down till he come hither.
<span class="verse" id="S116_12">12&#160;</span> And he sent, and brought him in. Now he <span class='add'>was</span> ruddy, <span class='add'>and</span> withal <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Arise, anoint him: for this <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="S116_13">13&#160;</span> Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_14">14&#160;</span>¶ But the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>troubled him.
<span class="verse" id="S116_15">15&#160;</span> And Saul’s servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubleth thee.
<span class="verse" id="S116_16">16&#160;</span> Let our lord now command thy servants, <span class='add'>which are</span> before thee, to seek out a man, <span class='add'>who is</span> a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shalt be well.
<span class="verse" id="S116_17">17&#160;</span> And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring <span class='add'>him</span> to me.
<span class="verse" id="S116_18">18&#160;</span> Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Beth-lehemite, <span class='add'>that is</span> cunning in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>matters, and a comely person, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me David thy son, which <span class='add'>is</span> with the sheep.
<span class="verse" id="S116_20">20&#160;</span> And Jesse took an ass <span class='add'>laden</span> with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent <span class='add'>them</span> by David his son unto Saul.
<span class="verse" id="S116_21">21&#160;</span> And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him greatly; and he became his armourbearer.
<span class="verse" id="S116_22">22&#160;</span> And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight.
<span class="verse" id="S116_23">23&#160;</span>And it came to pass, when the <span class='add'>evil</span> spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S117_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_1">1&#160;</span> Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Judah, and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ephes-dammim.
<span class="verse" id="S117_2">2&#160;</span> And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by the valley of Elah, and <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set the battle in array against the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S117_3">3&#160;</span> And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and <span class='add'>there was</span> a valley between them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height <span class='add'>was</span> six cubits and a span.
<span class="verse" id="S117_5">5&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he had</span> an helmet of brass upon his head, and he <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>armed with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat <span class='add'>was</span> five thousand shekels of brass.
<span class="verse" id="S117_6">6&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he had</span> greaves of brass upon his legs, and a <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>target of brass between his shoulders.
<span class="verse" id="S117_7">7&#160;</span> And the staff of his spear <span class='add'>was</span> like a weaver’s beam; and his spear’s head <span class='add'>weighed</span> six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a shield went before him.
<span class="verse" id="S117_8">8&#160;</span> And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye come out to set <span class='add'>your</span> battle in array? <span class='add'>am</span> not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me.
<span class="verse" id="S117_9">9&#160;</span> If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us.
<span class="verse" id="S117_10">10&#160;</span> And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we may fight together.
<span class="verse" id="S117_11">11&#160;</span> When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Now David <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the son of that Ephrathite of Beth-lehem-judah, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among men <span class='add'>for</span> an old man in the days of Saul.
<span class="verse" id="S117_13">13&#160;</span> And the three eldest sons of Jesse went <span class='add'>and</span> followed Saul to the battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle <span class='add'>were</span> Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.
<span class="verse" id="S117_14">14&#160;</span> And David <span class='add'>was</span> the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul.
<span class="verse" id="S117_15">15&#160;</span> But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father’s sheep at Beth-lehem.
<span class="verse" id="S117_16">16&#160;</span> And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days.
<span class="verse" id="S117_17">17&#160;</span> And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched <span class='add'>corn</span>, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp to thy brethren;
<span class="verse" id="S117_18">18&#160;</span> And carry these ten <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cheeses unto the <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>captain of <span class='add'>their</span> thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge.
<span class="verse" id="S117_19">19&#160;</span> Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, <span class='add'>were</span> in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came to the <a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trench, as the host was going forth to the <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fight, and shouted for the battle.
<span class="verse" id="S117_21">21&#160;</span> For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army against army.
<span class="verse" id="S117_22">22&#160;</span> And David left <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the carriage, and ran into the army, and came and <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>saluted his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="S117_23">23&#160;</span> And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S117_24">24&#160;</span> And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from him, and were sore afraid.
<span class="verse" id="S117_25">25&#160;</span> And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> the man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>will give him his daughter, and make his father’s house free in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S117_26">26&#160;</span> And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who <span class='add'>is</span> this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?
<span class="verse" id="S117_27">27&#160;</span> And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that killeth him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and Eliab’s anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle.
<span class="verse" id="S117_29">29&#160;</span> And David said, What have I now done? <span class='add'>Is there</span> not a cause? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_31">31&#160;</span> And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed <span class='add'>them</span> before Saul: and he <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sent for him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And David said to Saul, Let no man’s heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.
<span class="verse" id="S117_33">33&#160;</span> And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him: for thou <span class='add'>art but</span> a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.
<span class="verse" id="S117_34">34&#160;</span> And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father’s sheep, and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb out of the flock:
<span class="verse" id="S117_35">35&#160;</span> And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered <span class='add'>it</span> out of his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught <span class='add'>him</span> by his beard, and smote him, and slew him.
<span class="verse" id="S117_36">36&#160;</span> Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath defied the armies of the living God.
<span class="verse" id="S117_37">37&#160;</span> David said moreover, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_38">38&#160;</span>¶ And Saul <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail.
<span class="verse" id="S117_39">39&#160;</span> And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to go; for he had not proved <span class='add'>it</span>. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these; for I have not proved <span class='add'>them</span>. And David put them off him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_40">40&#160;</span> And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brook, and put them in a shepherd’s <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bag which he had, even in a scrip; and his sling <span class='add'>was</span> in his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine.
<span class="verse" id="S117_41">41&#160;</span> And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield <span class='add'>went</span> before him.
<span class="verse" id="S117_42">42&#160;</span> And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him: for he was <span class='add'>but</span> a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance.
<span class="verse" id="S117_43">43&#160;</span> And the Philistine said unto David, <span class='add'>Am</span> I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
<span class="verse" id="S117_44">44&#160;</span> And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.
<span class="verse" id="S117_45">45&#160;</span> Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied.
<span class="verse" id="S117_46">46&#160;</span> This day will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="S117_47">47&#160;</span> And all this assembly shall know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saveth not with sword and spear: for the battle <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>, and he will give you into our hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_48">48&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came and drew nigh to meet David, that David hasted, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.
<span class="verse" id="S117_49">49&#160;</span> And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and slang <span class='add'>it</span>, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S117_50">50&#160;</span> So <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but <span class='add'>there was</span> no sword in the hand of David.
<span class="verse" id="S117_51">51&#160;</span> Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled.
<span class="verse" id="S117_52">52&#160;</span> And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron.
<span class="verse" id="S117_53">53&#160;</span> And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their tents.
<span class="verse" id="S117_54">54&#160;</span> And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_55">55&#160;</span>¶ And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son <span class='add'>is</span> this youth? And Abner said, <span class='add'>As</span> thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell.
<span class="verse" id="S117_56">56&#160;</span> And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling <span class='add'>is</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S117_57">57&#160;</span> And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="S117_58">58&#160;</span> And Saul said to him, Whose son <span class='add'>art</span> thou, <span class='add'>thou</span> young man? And David answered, I <span class='add'>am</span> the son of thy servant Jesse the Beth-lehemite.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S118_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
<span class="verse" id="S118_2">2&#160;</span> And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="S118_3">3&#160;</span> Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.
<span class="verse" id="S118_4">4&#160;</span> And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that <span class='add'>was</span> upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>behaved himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul’s servants.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_6">6&#160;</span> And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the slaughter of the <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Philistine, that the women came out of all cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>instruments of musick.
<span class="verse" id="S118_7">7&#160;</span> And the women answered <span class='add'>one another</span> as they played, and said, <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.
<span class="verse" id="S118_8">8&#160;</span> And Saul was very wroth, and the saying <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>displeased him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed <span class='add'>but</span> thousands: and <span class='add'>what</span> can he have more but the kingdom?
<span class="verse" id="S118_9">9&#160;</span> And Saul eyed David from that day and forward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played with his hand, as at other times: and <span class='add'>there was</span> a javelin in Saul’s hand.
<span class="verse" id="S118_11">11&#160;</span> And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even to the wall <span class='add'>with it</span>. And David avoided out of his presence twice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Saul was afraid of David, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with him, and was departed from Saul.
<span class="verse" id="S118_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people.
<span class="verse" id="S118_14">14&#160;</span> And David <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="S118_15">15&#160;</span> Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him.
<span class="verse" id="S118_16">16&#160;</span> But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will I give thee to wife: only be thou <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>valiant for me, and fight the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.
<span class="verse" id="S118_18">18&#160;</span> And David said unto Saul, Who <span class='add'>am</span> I? and what <span class='add'>is</span> my life, <span class='add'>or</span> my father’s family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king?
<span class="verse" id="S118_19">19&#160;</span> But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul’s daughter should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife.
<span class="verse" id="S118_20">20&#160;</span> And Michal Saul’s daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the thing <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleased him.
<span class="verse" id="S118_21">21&#160;</span> And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in <span class='add'>the one of</span> the twain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And Saul commanded his servants, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Commune with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his servants love thee: now therefore be the king’s son in law.
<span class="verse" id="S118_23">23&#160;</span> And Saul’s servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David said, Seemeth it to you <span class='add'>a</span> light <span class='add'>thing</span> to be a king’s son in law, seeing that I <span class='add'>am</span> a poor man, and lightly esteemed?
<span class="verse" id="S118_24">24&#160;</span> And the servants of Saul told him, saying, <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>On this manner spake David.
<span class="verse" id="S118_25">25&#160;</span> And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king’s enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S118_26">26&#160;</span> And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king’s son in law: and the days were not <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>expired.
<span class="verse" id="S118_27">27&#160;</span> Wherefore David arose <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king’s son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And Saul saw and knew that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> with David, and <span class='add'>that</span> Michal Saul’s daughter loved him.
<span class="verse" id="S118_29">29&#160;</span> And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David’s enemy continually.
<span class="verse" id="S118_30">30&#160;</span> Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to pass, after they went forth, <span class='add'>that</span> David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set by.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S119_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_1">1&#160;</span> And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David.
<span class="verse" id="S119_2">2&#160;</span> But Jonathan Saul’s son delighted much in David: and Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and abide in a secret <span class='add'>place</span>, and hide thyself:
<span class="verse" id="S119_3">3&#160;</span> And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou <span class='add'>art</span>, and I will commune with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works <span class='add'>have been</span> to thee-ward very good:
<span class="verse" id="S119_5">5&#160;</span> For he did put his <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou sawest <span class='add'>it</span>, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause?
<span class="verse" id="S119_6">6&#160;</span> And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, he shall not be slain.
<span class="verse" id="S119_7">7&#160;</span> And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in times past.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>him.
<span class="verse" id="S119_9">9&#160;</span> And the evil spirit from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with <span class='add'>his</span> hand.
<span class="verse" id="S119_10">10&#160;</span> And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the javelin; but he slipped away out of Saul’s presence, and he smote the javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_11">11&#160;</span> Saul also sent messengers unto David’s house, to watch him, and to slay him in the morning: and Michal David’s wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_12">12&#160;</span>¶ So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled, and escaped.
<span class="verse" id="S119_13">13&#160;</span> And Michal took an image, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> in the bed, and put a pillow of goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span> for his bolster, and covered <span class='add'>it</span> with a cloth.
<span class="verse" id="S119_14">14&#160;</span> And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He <span class='add'>is</span> sick.
<span class="verse" id="S119_15">15&#160;</span> And Saul sent the messengers <span class='add'>again</span> to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him.
<span class="verse" id="S119_16">16&#160;</span> And when the messengers were come in, behold, <span class='add'>there was</span> an image in the bed, with a pillow of goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span> for his bolster.
<span class="verse" id="S119_17">17&#160;</span> And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_18">18&#160;</span>¶ So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
<span class="verse" id="S119_19">19&#160;</span> And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David <span class='add'>is</span> at Naioth in Ramah.
<span class="verse" id="S119_20">20&#160;</span> And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing <span class='add'>as</span> appointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied.
<span class="verse" id="S119_21">21&#160;</span> And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they prophesied also.
<span class="verse" id="S119_22">22&#160;</span> Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that <span class='add'>is</span> in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where <span class='add'>are</span> Samuel and David? And <span class='add'>one</span> said, Behold, <span class='add'>they be</span> at Naioth in Ramah.
<span class="verse" id="S119_23">23&#160;</span> And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
<span class="verse" id="S119_24">24&#160;</span> And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lay down naked all that day and all that night. Wherefore they say, <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>Is</span> Saul also among the prophets?</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S120_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_1">1&#160;</span> And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? what <span class='add'>is</span> mine iniquity? and what <span class='add'>is</span> my sin before thy father, that he seeketh my life?
<span class="verse" id="S120_2">2&#160;</span> And he said unto him, God forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either great or small, but that he will <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shew it me: and why should my father hide this thing from me? it <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>so</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S120_3">3&#160;</span> And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved: but truly <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, and <span class='add'>as</span> thy soul liveth, <span class='add'>there is</span> but a step between me and death.
<span class="verse" id="S120_4">4&#160;</span> Then said Jonathan unto David, <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Whatsoever thy soul <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>desireth, I will even do <span class='add'>it</span> for thee.
<span class="verse" id="S120_5">5&#160;</span> And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow <span class='add'>is</span> the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>field unto the third <span class='add'>day</span> at even.
<span class="verse" id="S120_6">6&#160;</span> If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked <span class='add'>leave</span> of me that he might run to Beth-lehem his city: for <span class='add'>there is</span> a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.
<span class="verse" id="S120_7">7&#160;</span> If he say thus, <span class='add'>It is</span> well; thy servant shall have peace: but if he be very wroth, <span class='add'>then</span> be sure that evil is determined by him.
<span class="verse" id="S120_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with thee: notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_9">9&#160;</span> And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee?
<span class="verse" id="S120_10">10&#160;</span> Then said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what <span class='add'>if</span> thy father answer thee roughly? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field.
<span class="verse" id="S120_12">12&#160;</span> And Jonathan said unto David, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, when I have <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sounded my father about to morrow any time, <span class='add'>or</span> the third <span class='add'>day</span>, and, behold, <span class='add'>if there be</span> good toward David, and I then send not unto thee, and <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shew it thee;
<span class="verse" id="S120_13">13&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do so and much more to Jonathan: but if it please my father <span class='add'>to do</span> thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be with thee, as he hath been with my father.
<span class="verse" id="S120_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I die not:
<span class="verse" id="S120_15">15&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>also</span> thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S120_16">16&#160;</span> So Jonathan <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made <span class='add'>a covenant</span> with the house of David, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Let the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> even require <span class='add'>it</span> at the hand of David’s enemies.
<span class="verse" id="S120_17">17&#160;</span> And Jonathan caused David to swear again, <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>because he loved him: for he loved him as he loved his own soul.
<span class="verse" id="S120_18">18&#160;</span> Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow <span class='add'>is</span> the new moon: and thou shalt be missed, because thy seat will be <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>empty.
<span class="verse" id="S120_19">19&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> thou hast stayed three days, <span class='add'>then</span> thou shalt go down <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when the business was <span class='add'>in hand</span>, and shalt remain by the stone <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ezel.
<span class="verse" id="S120_20">20&#160;</span> And I will shoot three arrows on the side <span class='add'>thereof</span>, as though I shot at a mark.
<span class="verse" id="S120_21">21&#160;</span> And, behold, I will send a lad, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows <span class='add'>are</span> on this side of thee, take them; then come thou: for <span class='add'>there is</span> peace to thee, and <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>no hurt; <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth.
<span class="verse" id="S120_22">22&#160;</span> But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows <span class='add'>are</span> beyond thee; go thy way: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sent thee away.
<span class="verse" id="S120_23">23&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as touching</span> the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> between thee and me for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_24">24&#160;</span>¶ So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to eat meat.
<span class="verse" id="S120_25">25&#160;</span> And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, <span class='add'>even</span> upon a seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul’s side, and David’s place was empty.
<span class="verse" id="S120_26">26&#160;</span> Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought, Something hath befallen him, he <span class='add'>is</span> not clean; surely he <span class='add'>is</span> not clean.
<span class="verse" id="S120_27">27&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, <span class='add'>which was</span> the second <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, that David’s place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day?
<span class="verse" id="S120_28">28&#160;</span> And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked <span class='add'>leave</span> of me <span class='add'>to go</span> to Beth-lehem:
<span class="verse" id="S120_29">29&#160;</span> And he said, Let me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath commanded me <span class='add'>to be there:</span> and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king’s table.
<span class="verse" id="S120_30">30&#160;</span> Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him, <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Thou son of the perverse rebellious <span class='add'>woman</span>, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother’s nakedness?
<span class="verse" id="S120_31">31&#160;</span> For as long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall surely die.
<span class="verse" id="S120_32">32&#160;</span> And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him, Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done?
<span class="verse" id="S120_33">33&#160;</span> And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay David.
<span class="verse" id="S120_34">34&#160;</span> So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because his father had done him shame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.
<span class="verse" id="S120_36">36&#160;</span> And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I shoot. <span class='add'>And</span> as the lad ran, he shot an arrow <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>beyond him.
<span class="verse" id="S120_37">37&#160;</span> And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, <span class='add'>Is</span> not the arrow beyond thee?
<span class="verse" id="S120_38">38&#160;</span> And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan’s lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.
<span class="verse" id="S120_39">39&#160;</span> But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the matter.
<span class="verse" id="S120_40">40&#160;</span> And Jonathan gave his <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>artillery unto <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his lad, and said unto him, Go, carry <span class='add'>them</span> to the city.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_41">41&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of <span class='add'>a place</span> toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded.
<span class="verse" id="S120_42">42&#160;</span> And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose and departed: and Jonathan went into the city.<span class='nd'></span>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S121_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_1">1&#160;</span> Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why <span class='add'>art</span> thou alone, and no man with thee?
<span class="verse" id="S121_2">2&#160;</span> And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I have commanded thee: and I have appointed <span class='add'>my</span> servants to such and such a place.
<span class="verse" id="S121_3">3&#160;</span> Now therefore what is under thine hand? give <span class='add'>me</span> five <span class='add'>loaves of</span> bread in mine hand, or what there is <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>present.
<span class="verse" id="S121_4">4&#160;</span> And the priest answered David, and said, <span class='add'>There is</span> no common bread under mine hand, but there is <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hallowed bread; if the young men have kept themselves at least from women.
<span class="verse" id="S121_5">5&#160;</span> And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth women <span class='add'>have been</span> kept from us about these three days, since I came out, and the vessels of the young men are holy, and <span class='add'>the bread is</span> in a manner common, <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel.
<span class="verse" id="S121_6">6&#160;</span> So the priest gave him hallowed <span class='add'>bread:</span> for there was no bread there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.
<span class="verse" id="S121_7">7&#160;</span> Now a certain man of the servants of Saul <span class='add'>was</span> there that day, detained before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and his name <span class='add'>was</span> Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that <span class='add'>belonged</span> to Saul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king’s business required haste.
<span class="verse" id="S121_9">9&#160;</span> And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the valley of Elah, behold, it <span class='add'>is here</span> wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take <span class='add'>it:</span> for <span class='add'>there is</span> no other save that here. And David said, <span class='add'>There is</span> none like that; give it me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.
<span class="verse" id="S121_11">11&#160;</span> And the servants of Achish said unto him, <span class='add'>Is</span> not this David the king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
<span class="verse" id="S121_12">12&#160;</span> And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
<span class="verse" id="S121_13">13&#160;</span> And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.
<span class="verse" id="S121_14">14&#160;</span> Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye see the man <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>is mad: wherefore <span class='add'>then</span> have ye brought him to me?
<span class="verse" id="S121_15">15&#160;</span> Have I need of mad men, that ye have brought this <span class='add'>fellow</span> to play the mad man in my presence? shall this <span class='add'>fellow</span> come into my house?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S122_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_1">1&#160;</span> David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Adullam: and when his brethren and all his father’s house heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they went down thither to him.
<span class="verse" id="S122_2">2&#160;</span> And every one <span class='add'>that was</span> in distress, and every one that <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>was</span> in debt, and every one <span class='add'>that was</span> <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, <span class='add'>and be</span> with you, till I know what God will do for me.
<span class="verse" id="S122_4">4&#160;</span> And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the hold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hareth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_6">6&#160;</span>¶ When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>tree in Ramah, having his spear in his hand, and all his servants <span class='add'>were</span> standing about him;)
<span class="verse" id="S122_7">7&#160;</span> Then Saul said unto his servants that stood about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites; will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards, <span class='add'>and</span> make you all captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds;
<span class="verse" id="S122_8">8&#160;</span> That all of you have conspired against me, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none that <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of Jesse, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none of you that is sorry for me, or sheweth unto me that my son hath stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.
<span class="verse" id="S122_10">10&#160;</span> And he enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
<span class="verse" id="S122_11">11&#160;</span> Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father’s house, the priests that <span class='add'>were</span> in Nob: and they came all of them to the king.
<span class="verse" id="S122_12">12&#160;</span> And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Here I <span class='add'>am</span>, my lord.
<span class="verse" id="S122_13">13&#160;</span> And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?
<span class="verse" id="S122_14">14&#160;</span> Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who <span class='add'>is so</span> faithful among all thy servants as David, which is the king’s son in law, and goeth at thy bidding, and is honourable in thine house?
<span class="verse" id="S122_15">15&#160;</span> Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute <span class='add'>any</span> thing unto his servant, <span class='add'>nor</span> to all the house of my father: for thy servant knew nothing of all this, <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>less or more.
<span class="verse" id="S122_16">16&#160;</span> And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the king said unto the <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>footmen that stood about him, Turn, and slay the priests of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; because their hand also <span class='add'>is</span> with David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S122_18">18&#160;</span> And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod.
<span class="verse" id="S122_19">19&#160;</span> And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.
<span class="verse" id="S122_21">21&#160;</span> And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> priests.
<span class="verse" id="S122_22">22&#160;</span> And David said unto Abiathar, I knew <span class='add'>it</span> that day, when Doeg the Edomite <span class='add'>was</span> there, that he would surely tell Saul: I have occasioned <span class='add'>the death</span> of all the persons of thy father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="S122_23">23&#160;</span> Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life: but with me thou <span class='add'>shalt be</span> in safeguard.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S123_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_1">1&#160;</span> Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight against Keilah, and they rob the threshingfloors.
<span class="verse" id="S123_2">2&#160;</span> Therefore David enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto David, Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.
<span class="verse" id="S123_3">3&#160;</span> And David’s men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?
<span class="verse" id="S123_4">4&#160;</span> Then David enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> yet again. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines into thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="S123_5">5&#160;</span> So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and smote them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.
<span class="verse" id="S123_6">6&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fled to David to Keilah, <span class='add'>that</span> he came down <span class='add'>with</span> an ephod in his hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars.
<span class="verse" id="S123_8">8&#160;</span> And Saul called all the people together to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod.
<span class="verse" id="S123_10">10&#160;</span> Then said David, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake.
<span class="verse" id="S123_11">11&#160;</span> Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? will Saul come down, as thy servant hath heard? O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, He will come down.
<span class="verse" id="S123_12">12&#160;</span> Then said David, Will the men of Keilah <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, They will deliver <span class='add'>thee</span> up.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then David and his men, <span class='add'>which were</span> about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go forth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_14">14&#160;</span> And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand.
<span class="verse" id="S123_15">15&#160;</span> And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life: and David <span class='add'>was</span> in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Jonathan Saul’s son arose, and went to David into the wood, and strengthened his hand in God.
<span class="verse" id="S123_17">17&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; and that also Saul my father knoweth.
<span class="verse" id="S123_18">18&#160;</span> And they two made a covenant before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and David abode in the wood, and Jonathan went to his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>on the south of <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jeshimon?
<span class="verse" id="S123_20">20&#160;</span> Now therefore, O king, come down according to all the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part <span class='add'>shall be</span> to deliver him into the king’s hand.
<span class="verse" id="S123_21">21&#160;</span> And Saul said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> ye of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for ye have compassion on me.
<span class="verse" id="S123_22">22&#160;</span> Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and see his place where his <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>haunt is, <span class='add'>and</span> who hath seen him there: for it is told me <span class='add'>that</span> he dealeth very subtilly.
<span class="verse" id="S123_23">23&#160;</span> See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I will go with you: and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land, that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="S123_24">24&#160;</span> And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men <span class='add'>were</span> in the wilderness of Maon, in the plain on the south of Jeshimon.
<span class="verse" id="S123_25">25&#160;</span> Saul also and his men went to seek <span class='add'>him</span>. And they told David: wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard <span class='add'>that</span>, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.
<span class="verse" id="S123_26">26&#160;</span> And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_27">27&#160;</span>¶ But there came a messenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thee, and come; for the Philistines have <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>invaded the land.
<span class="verse" id="S123_28">28&#160;</span> Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they called that place <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Sela-hammahlekoth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at En-gedi.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S124_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S124_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David <span class='add'>is</span> in the wilderness of En-gedi.
<span class="verse" id="S124_2">2&#160;</span> Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.
<span class="verse" id="S124_3">3&#160;</span> And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where <span class='add'>was</span> a cave; and Saul went in to cover his feet: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave.
<span class="verse" id="S124_4">4&#160;</span> And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good unto thee. Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Saul’s robe privily.
<span class="verse" id="S124_5">5&#160;</span> And it came to pass afterward, that David’s heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul’s skirt.
<span class="verse" id="S124_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto his men, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he <span class='add'>is</span> the anointed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S124_7">7&#160;</span> So David <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stayed his servants with these words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on <span class='add'>his</span> way.
<span class="verse" id="S124_8">8&#160;</span> David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David stooped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S124_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men’s words, saying, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt?
<span class="verse" id="S124_10">10&#160;</span> Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had delivered thee to day into mine hand in the cave: and <span class='add'>some</span> bade <span class='add'>me</span> kill thee: but <span class='add'>mine eye</span> spared thee; and I said, I will not put forth mine hand against my lord; for he <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed.
<span class="verse" id="S124_11">11&#160;</span> Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not, know thou and see that <span class='add'>there is</span> neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee; yet thou huntest my soul to take it.
<span class="verse" id="S124_12">12&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> judge between me and thee, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> avenge me of thee: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="S124_13">13&#160;</span> As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness proceedeth from the wicked: but mine hand shall not be upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="S124_14">14&#160;</span> After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea.
<span class="verse" id="S124_15">15&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> therefore be judge, and judge between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deliver me out of thine hand.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S124_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said, <span class='add'>Is</span> this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.
<span class="verse" id="S124_17">17&#160;</span> And he said to David, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil.
<span class="verse" id="S124_18">18&#160;</span> And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt well with me: forasmuch as when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst me not.
<span class="verse" id="S124_19">19&#160;</span> For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? wherefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> reward thee good for that thou hast done unto me this day.
<span class="verse" id="S124_20">20&#160;</span> And now, behold, I know well that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="S124_21">21&#160;</span> Swear now therefore unto me by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that thou wilt not cut off my seed after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="S124_22">22&#160;</span> And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S125_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_2">2&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> a man in Maon, whose <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>possessions <span class='add'>were</span> in Carmel; and the man <span class='add'>was</span> very great, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
<span class="verse" id="S125_3">3&#160;</span> Now the name of the man <span class='add'>was</span> Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail: and <span class='add'>she was</span> a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance: but the man <span class='add'>was</span> churlish and evil in his doings; and he <span class='add'>was</span> of the house of Caleb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal did shear his sheep.
<span class="verse" id="S125_5">5&#160;</span> And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>greet him in my name:
<span class="verse" id="S125_6">6&#160;</span> And thus shall ye say to him that liveth <span class='add'>in prosperity</span>, Peace <span class='add'>be</span> both to thee, and peace <span class='add'>be</span> to thine house, and peace <span class='add'>be</span> unto all that thou hast.
<span class="verse" id="S125_7">7&#160;</span> And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds which were with us, we <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hurt them not, neither was there ought missing unto them, all the while they were in Carmel.
<span class="verse" id="S125_8">8&#160;</span> Ask thy young men, and they will shew thee. Wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a good day: give, I pray thee, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to thy son David.
<span class="verse" id="S125_9">9&#160;</span> And when David’s young men came, they spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ceased.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Nabal answered David’s servants, and said, Who <span class='add'>is</span> David? and who <span class='add'>is</span> the son of Jesse? there be many servants now a days that break away every man from his master.
<span class="verse" id="S125_11">11&#160;</span> Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give <span class='add'>it</span> unto men, whom I know not whence they <span class='add'>be</span>?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_12">12&#160;</span> So David’s young men turned their way, and went again, and came and told him all those sayings.
<span class="verse" id="S125_13">13&#160;</span> And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred abode by the stuff. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_14">14&#160;</span>¶ But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master; and he <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>railed on them.
<span class="verse" id="S125_15">15&#160;</span> But the men <span class='add'>were</span> very good unto us, and we were not <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hurt, neither missed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we were in the fields:
<span class="verse" id="S125_16">16&#160;</span> They were a wall unto us both by night and day, all the while we were with them keeping <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the sheep.
<span class="verse" id="S125_17">17&#160;</span> Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is determined against our master, and against all his household: for he <span class='add'>is such</span> a son of Belial, that <span class='add'>a man</span> cannot speak to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched <span class='add'>corn</span>, and an hundred <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid <span class='add'>them</span> on asses.
<span class="verse" id="S125_19">19&#160;</span> And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come after you. But she told not her husband Nabal.
<span class="verse" id="S125_20">20&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so, as</span> she rode on the ass, that she came down by the covert of the hill, and, behold, David and his men came down against her; and she met them.
<span class="verse" id="S125_21">21&#160;</span> Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this <span class='add'>fellow</span> hath in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that <span class='add'>pertained</span> unto him: and he hath requited me evil for good.
<span class="verse" id="S125_22">22&#160;</span> So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of all that <span class='add'>pertain</span> to him by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.
<span class="verse" id="S125_23">23&#160;</span> And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted off the ass, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground,
<span class="verse" id="S125_24">24&#160;</span> And fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, <span class='add'>upon</span> me <span class='add'>let this</span> iniquity <span class='add'>be:</span> and let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid.
<span class="verse" id="S125_25">25&#160;</span> Let not my lord, I pray thee, <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>regard this man of Belial, <span class='add'>even</span> Nabal: for as his name <span class='add'>is</span>, so <span class='add'>is</span> he; Nabal <span class='add'>is</span> his name, and folly <span class='add'>is</span> with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send.
<span class="verse" id="S125_26">26&#160;</span> Now therefore, my lord, <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, and <span class='add'>as</span> thy soul liveth, seeing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath withholden thee from coming to <span class='add'>shed</span> blood, and from <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.
<span class="verse" id="S125_27">27&#160;</span> And now this <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blessing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young men that <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>follow my lord.
<span class="verse" id="S125_28">28&#160;</span> I pray thee, forgive the trespass of thine handmaid: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the battles of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and evil hath not been found in thee <span class='add'>all</span> thy days.
<span class="verse" id="S125_29">29&#160;</span> Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul: but the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shall he sling out, <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>as out</span> of the middle of a sling.
<span class="verse" id="S125_30">30&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he hath spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee ruler over Israel;
<span class="verse" id="S125_31">31&#160;</span> That this shall be <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>no grief unto thee, nor offence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blood causeless, or that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thine handmaid.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And David said to Abigail, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me:
<span class="verse" id="S125_33">33&#160;</span> And blessed <span class='add'>be</span> thy advice, and blessed <span class='add'>be</span> thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to <span class='add'>shed</span> blood, and from avenging myself with mine own hand.
<span class="verse" id="S125_34">34&#160;</span> For in very deed, <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted and come to meet me, surely there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pisseth against the wall.
<span class="verse" id="S125_35">35&#160;</span> So David received of her hand <span class='add'>that</span> which she had brought him, and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; see, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal’s heart <span class='add'>was</span> merry within him, for he <span class='add'>was</span> very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.
<span class="verse" id="S125_37">37&#160;</span> But it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died within him, and he became <span class='add'>as</span> a stone.
<span class="verse" id="S125_38">38&#160;</span> And it came to pass about ten days <span class='add'>after</span>, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote Nabal, that he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath returned the wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her to him to wife.
<span class="verse" id="S125_40">40&#160;</span> And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thee, to take thee to him to wife.
<span class="verse" id="S125_41">41&#160;</span> And she arose, and bowed herself on <span class='add'>her</span> face to the earth, and said, Behold, <span class='add'>let</span> thine handmaid <span class='add'>be</span> a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.
<span class="verse" id="S125_42">42&#160;</span> And Abigail hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass, with five damsels of hers that went <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>after her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.
<span class="verse" id="S125_43">43&#160;</span> David also took Ahinoam <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of Jezreel; and they were also both of them his wives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_44">44&#160;</span>¶ But Saul had given <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which <span class='add'>was</span> of Gallim.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S126_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_1">1&#160;</span> And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Doth not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, <span class='add'>which is</span> before Jeshimon?
<span class="verse" id="S126_2">2&#160;</span> Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
<span class="verse" id="S126_3">3&#160;</span> And Saul pitched in the hill of Hachilah, which <span class='add'>is</span> before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="S126_4">4&#160;</span> David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul was come in very deed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trench, and the people pitched round about him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_6">6&#160;</span> Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.
<span class="verse" id="S126_7">7&#160;</span> So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him.
<span class="verse" id="S126_8">8&#160;</span> Then said Abishai to David, God hath <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I will not <span class='add'>smite</span> him the second time.
<span class="verse" id="S126_9">9&#160;</span> And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed, and be guiltless?
<span class="verse" id="S126_10">10&#160;</span> David said furthermore, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall smite him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall descend into battle, and perish.
<span class="verse" id="S126_11">11&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed: but, I pray thee, take thou now the spear that <span class='add'>is</span> at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go.
<span class="verse" id="S126_12">12&#160;</span> So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul’s bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw <span class='add'>it</span>, nor knew <span class='add'>it</span>, neither awaked: for they <span class='add'>were</span> all asleep; because a deep sleep from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was fallen upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of an hill afar off; a great space <span class='add'>being</span> between them:
<span class="verse" id="S126_14">14&#160;</span> And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who <span class='add'>art</span> thou <span class='add'>that</span> criest to the king?
<span class="verse" id="S126_15">15&#160;</span> And David said to Abner, <span class='add'>Art</span> not thou a <span class='add'>valiant</span> man? and who <span class='add'>is</span> like to thee in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.
<span class="verse" id="S126_16">16&#160;</span> This thing <span class='add'>is</span> not good that thou hast done. <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, ye <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed. And now see where the king’s spear <span class='add'>is</span>, and the cruse of water that <span class='add'>was</span> at his bolster.
<span class="verse" id="S126_17">17&#160;</span> And Saul knew David’s voice, and said, <span class='add'>Is</span> this thy voice, my son David? And David said, <span class='add'>It is</span> my voice, my lord, O king.
<span class="verse" id="S126_18">18&#160;</span> And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil <span class='add'>is</span> in mine hand?
<span class="verse" id="S126_19">19&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have stirred thee up against me, let him <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>accept an offering: but if <span class='add'>they be</span> the children of men, cursed <span class='add'>be</span> they before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for they have driven me out this day from <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abiding in the inheritance of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Go, serve other gods.
<span class="verse" id="S126_20">20&#160;</span> Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth before the face of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for the king of Israel is come out to seek a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then said Saul, I have sinned: return, my son David: for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.
<span class="verse" id="S126_22">22&#160;</span> And David answered and said, Behold the king’s spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it.
<span class="verse" id="S126_23">23&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered thee into <span class='add'>my</span> hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anointed.
<span class="verse" id="S126_24">24&#160;</span> And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.
<span class="verse" id="S126_25">25&#160;</span> Then Saul said to David, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great <span class='add'>things</span>, and also shalt still prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S127_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_1">1&#160;</span> And David said in his heart, I shall now <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>perish one day by the hand of Saul: <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing better for me than that I should speedily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shall despair of me, to seek me any more in any coast of Israel: so shall I escape out of his hand.
<span class="verse" id="S127_2">2&#160;</span> And David arose, and he passed over with the six hundred men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
<span class="verse" id="S127_3">3&#160;</span> And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, <span class='add'>even</span> David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="S127_4">4&#160;</span> And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no more again for him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dwell there: for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?
<span class="verse" id="S127_6">6&#160;</span> Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="S127_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a full year and four months.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those <span class='add'>nations were</span> of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="S127_9">9&#160;</span> And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the asses, and the camels, and the apparel, and returned, and came to Achish.
<span class="verse" id="S127_10">10&#160;</span> And Achish said, <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites.
<span class="verse" id="S127_11">11&#160;</span> And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring <span class='add'>tidings</span> to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell on us, saying, So did David, and so <span class='add'>will be</span> his manner all the while he dwelleth in the country of the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="S127_12">12&#160;</span> And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>utterly to abhor him; therefore he shall be my servant for ever.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S128_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to battle, thou and thy men.
<span class="verse" id="S128_2">2&#160;</span> And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Now <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.
<span class="verse" id="S128_4">4&#160;</span> And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa.
<span class="verse" id="S128_5">5&#160;</span> And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled.
<span class="verse" id="S128_6">6&#160;</span> And when Saul enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Then said Saul unto his servants, Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>servants said to him, Behold, <span class='add'>there is</span> a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor.
<span class="verse" id="S128_8">8&#160;</span> And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me <span class='add'>him</span> up, whom I shall name unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="S128_9">9&#160;</span> And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die?
<span class="verse" id="S128_10">10&#160;</span> And Saul sware to her by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.
<span class="verse" id="S128_11">11&#160;</span> Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.
<span class="verse" id="S128_12">12&#160;</span> And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou <span class='add'>art</span> Saul.
<span class="verse" id="S128_13">13&#160;</span> And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="S128_14">14&#160;</span> And he said unto her, <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>What form <span class='add'>is</span> he of? And she said, An old man cometh up; and he <span class='add'>is</span> covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it <span class='add'>was</span> Samuel, and he stooped with <span class='add'>his</span> face to the ground, and bowed himself.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do.
<span class="verse" id="S128_16">16&#160;</span> Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, seeing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is departed from thee, and is become thine enemy?
<span class="verse" id="S128_17">17&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath done <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to him, <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as he spake by <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>me: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, <span class='add'>even</span> to David:
<span class="verse" id="S128_18">18&#160;</span> Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> done this thing unto thee this day.
<span class="verse" id="S128_19">19&#160;</span> Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will also deliver Israel with thee into the hand of the Philistines: and to morrow <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou and thy sons <span class='add'>be</span> with me: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_20">20&#160;</span> Then Saul <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fell straightway all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me.
<span class="verse" id="S128_22">22&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way.
<span class="verse" id="S128_23">23&#160;</span> But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed.
<span class="verse" id="S128_24">24&#160;</span> And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and killed it, and took flour, and kneaded <span class='add'>it</span>, and did bake unleavened bread thereof:
<span class="verse" id="S128_25">25&#160;</span> And she brought <span class='add'>it</span> before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S129_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_1">1&#160;</span> Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jezreel.
<span class="verse" id="S129_2">2&#160;</span> And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men passed on in the rereward with Achish.
<span class="verse" id="S129_3">3&#160;</span> Then said the princes of the Philistines, What <span class='add'>do</span> these Hebrews <span class='add'>here</span>? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, <span class='add'>Is</span> not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath been with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell <span class='add'>unto me</span> unto this day?
<span class="verse" id="S129_4">4&#160;</span> And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Make this fellow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? <span class='add'>should it</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> with the heads of these men?
<span class="verse" id="S129_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then Achish called David, and said unto him, Surely, <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, thou hast been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host <span class='add'>is</span> good in my sight: for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheless <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the lords favour thee not.
<span class="verse" id="S129_7">7&#160;</span> Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>displease not the lords of the Philistines.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have been <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with thee unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
<span class="verse" id="S129_9">9&#160;</span> And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou <span class='add'>art</span> good in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.
<span class="verse" id="S129_10">10&#160;</span> Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master’s servants that are come with thee: and as soon as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart.
<span class="verse" id="S129_11">11&#160;</span> So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S130_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire;
<span class="verse" id="S130_2">2&#160;</span> And had taken the women captives, that <span class='add'>were</span> therein: they slew not any, either great or small, but carried <span class='add'>them</span> away, and went on their way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_3">3&#160;</span>¶ So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, <span class='add'>it was</span> burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives.
<span class="verse" id="S130_4">4&#160;</span> Then David and the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.
<span class="verse" id="S130_5">5&#160;</span> And David’s two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
<span class="verse" id="S130_6">6&#160;</span> And David was greatly distressed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_7">7&#160;</span> And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech’s son, I pray thee, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David.
<span class="verse" id="S130_8">8&#160;</span> And David enquired at the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Shall I pursue after this troop? shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake <span class='add'>them</span>, and without fail recover <span class='add'>all</span>.
<span class="verse" id="S130_9">9&#160;</span> So David went, he and the six hundred men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those that were left behind stayed.
<span class="verse" id="S130_10">10&#160;</span> But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water;
<span class="verse" id="S130_12">12&#160;</span> And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk <span class='add'>any</span> water, three days and three nights.
<span class="verse" id="S130_13">13&#160;</span> And David said unto him, To whom <span class='add'>belongest</span> thou? and whence <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span> a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days agone I fell sick.
<span class="verse" id="S130_14">14&#160;</span> We made an invasion <span class='add'>upon</span> the south of the Cherethites, and upon <span class='add'>the coast</span> which <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.
<span class="verse" id="S130_15">15&#160;</span> And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kill me, nor deliver me into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this company. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And when he had brought him down, behold, <span class='add'>they were</span> spread abroad upon all the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="S130_17">17&#160;</span> And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, which rode upon camels, and fled.
<span class="verse" id="S130_18">18&#160;</span> And David recovered all that the Amalekites had carried away: and David rescued his two wives.
<span class="verse" id="S130_19">19&#160;</span> And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any <span class='add'>thing</span> that they had taken to them: David recovered all.
<span class="verse" id="S130_20">20&#160;</span> And David took all the flocks and the herds, <span class='add'>which</span> they drave before those <span class='add'>other</span> cattle, and said, This <span class='add'>is</span> David’s spoil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they could not follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brook Besor: and they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him: and when David came near to the people, he <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>saluted them.
<span class="verse" id="S130_22">22&#160;</span> Then answered all the wicked men and <span class='add'>men</span> of Belial, of <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>those that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them <span class='add'>ought</span> of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead <span class='add'>them</span> away, and depart.
<span class="verse" id="S130_23">23&#160;</span> Then said David, Ye shall not do so, my brethren, with that which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the company that came against us into our hand.
<span class="verse" id="S130_24">24&#160;</span> For who will hearken unto you in this matter? but as his part <span class='add'>is</span> that goeth down to the battle, so <span class='add'>shall</span> his part <span class='add'>be</span> that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike.
<span class="verse" id="S130_25">25&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span> from that day <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, <span class='add'>even</span> to his friends, saying, Behold a <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>;
<span class="verse" id="S130_27">27&#160;</span>To <span class='add'> them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Beth-el, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in south Ramoth, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Jattir,
<span class="verse" id="S130_28">28&#160;</span>And to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Aroer, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Siphmoth, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Eshtemoa,
<span class="verse" id="S130_29">29&#160;</span>And to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Rachal, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in the cities of the Kenites,
<span class="verse" id="S130_30">30&#160;</span>And to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Hormah, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Chor-ashan, and to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Athach,
<span class="verse" id="S130_31">31&#160;</span>And to <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='S131_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S131_1">1&#160;</span> Now <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>slain in mount Gilboa.
<span class="verse" id="S131_2">2&#160;</span> And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, Saul’s sons.
<span class="verse" id="S131_3">3&#160;</span> And the battle went sore against Saul, and the <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>archers <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hit him; and he was sore wounded of the archers.
<span class="verse" id="S131_4">4&#160;</span> Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.
<span class="verse" id="S131_5">5&#160;</span> And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his sword, and died with him.
<span class="verse" id="S131_6">6&#160;</span> So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armourbearer, and all his men, that same day together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S131_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And when the men of Israel that <span class='add'>were</span> on the other side of the valley, and <span class='add'>they</span> that <span class='add'>were</span> on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S131_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
<span class="verse" id="S131_9">9&#160;</span> And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish <span class='add'>it in</span> the house of their idols, and among the people.
<span class="verse" id="S131_10">10&#160;</span> And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S131_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of that which the Philistines had done to Saul;
<span class="verse" id="S131_12">12&#160;</span> All the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and came to Jabesh, and <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>burnt them there.
<span class="verse" id="S131_13">13&#160;</span> And they took their bones, and <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>buried <span class='add'>them</span> under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from year to year.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a double portion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. angered her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from the time that she, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from her going up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bitter of soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. seed of men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_5'>6. 5</a> Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG13_5'>13. 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiplied to pray.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard of spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, meditation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. revolution of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Asked of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">returned him, whom I have obtained by petition, to the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he whom I have obtained by petition shall be returned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_39'>32. 39</a>. Tob. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB13_2'>13. 2</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_13'>16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS113_7'>113. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as on the day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_4'>28. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, petition which she asked, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. assembled by troops</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I hear evil words of you.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to cry out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_14'>10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the affliction of the tabernacle, for all the wealth which God would have given Israel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Join.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_36"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, somewhat about the priesthood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Thus did <span class="add">Samuel, before he knew the <span class="nd">Lord,</span> and before the word of the <span class="nd">Lord</span> was revealed unto him.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K221_12'>21. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. beginning and ending.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, And I will tell him, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 2. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_29'>29</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_30'>30</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_31'>31</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, accursed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. frowned not upon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. so add.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all the things, or, words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S13_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, faithful.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, came to pass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the battle was spread.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the array.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. take unto us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. yesterday, or, the third day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG18_1'>18. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. died.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S13_2'>3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it the thing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to cry out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were turned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. set not her heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Where is the glory? or, There is no glory.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S15_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the fishy part.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S15_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_66'>78. 66</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reproachfully.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_31'>12. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S16_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, great stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh 24. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_15'>15</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_13'>2. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_4'>6 4</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_10'>4. 10</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_8'>4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_11'>2 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Be not silent from us from crying.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, answered</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The stone of help.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and he circuited.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S18_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_19'>16. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S18_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS13_10'>13. 10</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S18_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was evil in the eyes of Samuel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S18_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, obey.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S18_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, notwithstanding, when thou hast solemnly protested against them, then thou shalt shew, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S18_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eunuchs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_51'>14. 51</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R18_83'>8. 83</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the son of a man of Jemini.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or. substance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is gone out of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is with us?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. there is found in my hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Thy word is good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the ascent of the city.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, feast.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_1'>15. 1</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. revealed the ear of Samuel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. restrain in.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to day three days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to this word?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reserved.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_20'>35. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the business.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ash thee of peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it shall come to pass, that when these signs, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. do for thee as thine hand shall find.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S113_8'>13. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. turned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 of the prophets]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man to his neighbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S119_24'>19. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from thence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Let the king live.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S110_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he was as though he had been deaf.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S111_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb Forbear us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S111_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as one man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S111_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, deliverance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_19'>46. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ransom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that I should hide mine eyes at him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, made.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. righteousnesses, or, benefits.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. 46. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_5'>5</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_16'>4. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_2'>4. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG11_1'>11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be after.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from ceasing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S112_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, what a great thing, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the son of one year in his reigning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The hill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. did stink.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. trembled after him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S110_8'>10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bless him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. intreated the face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a file with mouths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to set.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, standing camp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, there was a day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S14_21'>4. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. tooth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R214_11'>14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Be still.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Mac. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_30'>4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, half a furrow of an acre of land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a trembling of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, tumult.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were cried together.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_22'>7. 22</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_23'>20. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, weary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV7_26'>7. 26</a>. &amp;c <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_26'>19. 26</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_16'>12. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dealt treacherously.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">that altar he began to build unto the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG20_2'>20. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. corners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_41"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Shew the innocent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_41"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. went forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S114_48"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wrought mightily.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='1SA.xhtml#S19_16'>9. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_8'>17. 8</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU24_20'>24. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fought.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of the second sort.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they consume them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_1'>5. 1</a>. Hos <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_6'>6. 6</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_13'>9. 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_7'>12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. divination.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Eternity, or, victory.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_11'>17. 11</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_45'>14. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in thine hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. meeting.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R128_9'>28. 9</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_9'>7. 9</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_20'>11. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_10'>17. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR20_12'>20. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_8'>7. 8</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_70'>78. 70</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. round.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fair of eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, terrified.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S116_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, speech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The coast of Dammim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ranged the battle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. clothed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gorget.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_1'>16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cheeses of milk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb captain of a thousand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, place of the carriage.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, battle array, or, place of fight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the vessels from upon him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. asked his brethren of peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from his face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_16'>15. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. took him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. clothed David with his clothes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_40"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valley.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vessel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_46"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shut thee up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_4'>47. 4</a>. 1 Mac. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_30'>4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits had]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prospered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Philistines.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. three stringed instruments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S121_11'>21. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S129_5'>29. 5</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_6'>47. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was evil in his eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prospered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a son of valour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was right in his eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. According to these words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fulfilled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_27"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 18.27</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits and went]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S118_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. precious.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S119_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_17'>9. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG12_3'>12 3</a>. ch <a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_21'>28 21</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_109'>119. 109</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S119_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. yesterday third day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S119_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S119_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S119_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S110_11'>10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. uncover mine ear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Say what is thy mind, and I will do, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb speaketh, or, thinketh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 fields]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S118_3'>18. 3</a> &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S123_18'>23. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. searched.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. uncover thine ear</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, by his love towards him</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. missed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, diligently.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. greatly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the day of the business.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that sheweth the way.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. not any thing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Thou perverse rebel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Son of perverse rebellion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is the son of death.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to pass over him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. instruments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that was his.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S120_42"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the <span class="nd">Lord</span> be witness of that which, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_30'>25. 30</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_5'>24. 5</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_4'>12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, especially when this day there is other sanctified in the vessel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_2'>17. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S118_7'>18 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S129_5'>29. 5</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_6'>47. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, made marks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S121_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, playeth the mad man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. had a creditor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bitter of soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grove in a high place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. uncovereth mine ear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Behold me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. little or great.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, guard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S122_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. runners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='1SA.xhtml#S122_20'>22. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shut up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. on the right hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the wilderness?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. foot shall be.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spread themselves upon, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.28</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The rock of divisions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S124_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. after.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S124_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the robe which was Saul's.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S124_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S124_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. judge.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S124_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shut up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_3'>28. 3</a>. Ecclus. 46. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_13'>13</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_20'>20</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, business.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ask him in my name of peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shamed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rested.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. slaughter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. flew upon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shamed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 25.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lumps.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ears.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lay it to his heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb saving thyself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, present.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. walk at the feet of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the midst of the bought of a sling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. no staggering, or, stumbling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at her feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_56'>15. 56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.44</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. 3 <a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_14'>14</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='1SA.xhtml#S123_19'>23. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_50'>14 50</a>. &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_55'>17. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, midst of his carriages.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shut up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the sons of death.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb smell.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S126_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cleaving.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S127_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be consumed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S127_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the number of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S127_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a year of days</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S127_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Gerzites.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S127_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Did you not make a road, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S127_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to stink.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S125_1'>25. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 servant]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. What is his form?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of prophets.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for himself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_28'>15. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mine hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S128_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made haste, and fell with the fulness of his stature.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S129_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R112_19'>12. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S129_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S118_7'>18. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S121_11'>21. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S129_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb thou art not good in the eyes of the lords.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S129_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. do not evil in the eyes of the lords.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S129_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S130_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bitter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S130_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. their morrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S130_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, asked them how they did.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S130_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S130_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and forward.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S130_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. blessing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.1</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R110_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wounded.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shooters, men with bows.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mock me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, concerning him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR34_5'>34. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.13</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S22_4'>2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
