<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 1 Thessalonians 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Thessalonians</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1TH.xhtml#H11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1TH.xhtml#H12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1TH.xhtml#H13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_0'>5</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='H10_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='H11_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="H11_1">1&#160;</span> Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Thessalonians <span class='add'>which is</span> in God the Father and <span class='add'>in</span> the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace <span class='add'>be</span> unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="H11_2">2&#160;</span> We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers;
<span class="verse" id="H11_3">3&#160;</span> Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father;
<span class="verse" id="H11_4">4&#160;</span> Knowing, brethren <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>beloved, your election of God.
<span class="verse" id="H11_5">5&#160;</span> For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake.
<span class="verse" id="H11_6">6&#160;</span> And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost:
<span class="verse" id="H11_7">7&#160;</span> So that ye were ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.
<span class="verse" id="H11_8">8&#160;</span> For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we need not to speak any thing.
<span class="verse" id="H11_9">9&#160;</span> For they themselves shew of us what manner of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God;
<span class="verse" id="H11_10">10&#160;</span> And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, <span class='add'>even</span> Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='H12_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H12_1">1&#160;</span> For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain:
<span class="verse" id="H12_2">2&#160;</span> But even after that we had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention.
<span class="verse" id="H12_3">3&#160;</span> For our exhortation <span class='add'>was</span> not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, nor in guile:
<span class="verse" id="H12_4">4&#160;</span> But as we were allowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts.
<span class="verse" id="H12_5">5&#160;</span> For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousness; God <span class='add'>is</span> witness:
<span class="verse" id="H12_6">6&#160;</span> Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor <span class='add'>yet</span> of others, when we might have <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>been burdensome, as the apostles of Christ.
<span class="verse" id="H12_7">7&#160;</span> But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children:
<span class="verse" id="H12_8">8&#160;</span> So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us.
<span class="verse" id="H12_9">9&#160;</span> For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you the gospel of God.
<span class="verse" id="H12_10">10&#160;</span> Ye <span class='add'>are</span> witnesses, and God <span class='add'>also</span>, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe:
<span class="verse" id="H12_11">11&#160;</span> As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father <span class='add'>doth</span> his children,
<span class="verse" id="H12_12">12&#160;</span> That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his kingdom and glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H12_13">13&#160;</span> For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received <span class='add'>it</span> not <span class='add'>as</span> the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe.
<span class="verse" id="H12_14">14&#160;</span> For ye, brethren, became followers of the churches of God which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they <span class='add'>have</span> of the Jews:
<span class="verse" id="H12_15">15&#160;</span> Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to all men:
<span class="verse" id="H12_16">16&#160;</span> Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H12_17">17&#160;</span> But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to see your face with great desire.
<span class="verse" id="H12_18">18&#160;</span> Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us.
<span class="verse" id="H12_19">19&#160;</span> For what <span class='add'>is</span> our hope, or joy, or crown of <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rejoicing? <span class='add'>Are</span> not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?
<span class="verse" id="H12_20">20&#160;</span> For ye are our glory and joy.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='H13_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H13_1">1&#160;</span> Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to be left at Athens alone;
<span class="verse" id="H13_2">2&#160;</span> And sent Timotheus, our brother, and minister of God, and our fellowlabourer in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith:
<span class="verse" id="H13_3">3&#160;</span> That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto.
<span class="verse" id="H13_4">4&#160;</span> For verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we should suffer tribulation; even as it came to pass, and ye know.
<span class="verse" id="H13_5">5&#160;</span> For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labour be in vain.
<span class="verse" id="H13_6">6&#160;</span> But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to see us, as we also <span class='add'>to see</span> you:
<span class="verse" id="H13_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our affliction and distress by your faith:
<span class="verse" id="H13_8">8&#160;</span> For now we <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>live, if ye stand fast in the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="H13_9">9&#160;</span> For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God;
<span class="verse" id="H13_10">10&#160;</span> Night and day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith?
<span class="verse" id="H13_11">11&#160;</span> Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>direct our way unto you.
<span class="verse" id="H13_12">12&#160;</span> And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all <span class='add'>men</span>, even as we <span class='add'>do</span> toward you:
<span class="verse" id="H13_13">13&#160;</span> To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='H14_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H14_1">1&#160;</span> Furthermore then we <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>beseech you, brethren, and <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>exhort <span class='add'>you</span> by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, <span class='add'> so</span> ye would abound more and more.
<span class="verse" id="H14_2">2&#160;</span> For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="H14_3">3&#160;</span> For this is the will of God, <span class='add'>even</span> your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication:
<span class="verse" id="H14_4">4&#160;</span> That every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour;
<span class="verse" id="H14_5">5&#160;</span> Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God:
<span class="verse" id="H14_6">6&#160;</span> That no <span class='add'>man</span> go beyond and <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>defraud his brother <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in <span class='add'>any</span> matter: because that the Lord <span class='add'>is</span> the avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.
<span class="verse" id="H14_7">7&#160;</span> For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.
<span class="verse" id="H14_8">8&#160;</span> He therefore that <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit.
<span class="verse" id="H14_9">9&#160;</span> But as touching brotherly love ye need not that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another.
<span class="verse" id="H14_10">10&#160;</span> And indeed ye do it toward all the brethren which are in all Macedonia: but we beseech you, brethren, that ye increase more and more;
<span class="verse" id="H14_11">11&#160;</span> And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you;
<span class="verse" id="H14_12">12&#160;</span> That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and <span class='add'>that</span> ye may have lack <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H14_13">13&#160;</span> But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.
<span class="verse" id="H14_14">14&#160;</span> For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.
<span class="verse" id="H14_15">15&#160;</span> For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive <span class='add'>and</span> remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep.
<span class="verse" id="H14_16">16&#160;</span> For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first:
<span class="verse" id="H14_17">17&#160;</span> Then we which are alive <span class='add'>and</span> remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="H14_18">18&#160;</span> Wherefore <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>comfort one another with these words.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='H15_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H15_1">1&#160;</span> But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you.
<span class="verse" id="H15_2">2&#160;</span> For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night.
<span class="verse" id="H15_3">3&#160;</span> For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape.
<span class="verse" id="H15_4">4&#160;</span> But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.
<span class="verse" id="H15_5">5&#160;</span> Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkness.
<span class="verse" id="H15_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore let us not sleep, as <span class='add'>do</span> others; but let us watch and be sober.
<span class="verse" id="H15_7">7&#160;</span> For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night.
<span class="verse" id="H15_8">8&#160;</span> But let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation.
<span class="verse" id="H15_9">9&#160;</span> For God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ,
<span class="verse" id="H15_10">10&#160;</span> Who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.
<span class="verse" id="H15_11">11&#160;</span> Wherefore <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H15_12">12&#160;</span> And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you;
<span class="verse" id="H15_13">13&#160;</span> And to esteem them very highly in love for their work’s sake. <span class='add'>And</span> be at peace among yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="H15_14">14&#160;</span> Now we <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>exhort you, brethren, warn them that are <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unruly, comfort the feebleminded, support the weak, be patient toward all <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="H15_15">15&#160;</span> See that none render evil for evil unto any <span class='add'>man</span>; but ever follow that which is good, both among yourselves, and to all <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="H15_16">16&#160;</span> Rejoice evermore.
<span class="verse" id="H15_17">17&#160;</span> Pray without ceasing.
<span class="verse" id="H15_18">18&#160;</span> In every thing give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.
<span class="verse" id="H15_19">19&#160;</span> Quench not the Spirit.
<span class="verse" id="H15_20">20&#160;</span> Despise not prophesyings.
<span class="verse" id="H15_21">21&#160;</span> Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.
<span class="verse" id="H15_22">22&#160;</span> Abstain from all appearance of evil.
<span class="verse" id="H15_23">23&#160;</span> And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and <span class='add'>I pray God</span> your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="H15_24">24&#160;</span> Faithful <span class='add'>is</span> he that calleth you, who also will do <span class='add'>it.</span>
<span class="verse" id="H15_25">25&#160;</span> Brethren, pray for us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="H15_26">26&#160;</span> Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss.
<span class="verse" id="H15_27">27&#160;</span> I <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren.
<span class="verse" id="H15_28">28&#160;</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ <span class='add'>be</span> with you. Amen. </div>
<div class='s'>The first <span class='add'>epistle</span> unto the Thessalonians was written from Athens. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H11_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">beloved of God, your election.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H12_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">used authority.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H12_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">chased us out.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H12_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">glorying.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H13_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_9'>7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H13_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">guide.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">request.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">beseech.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">oppress,</span> or, <span class="add">overreach.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in the matter.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">rejecteth.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">of no man.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H14_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">exhort.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H15_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">exhort.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H15_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">beseech.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H15_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">disorderly.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#H15_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">adjure.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
