<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE 2 Esdras 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Esdras</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='E20_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Second Book of Esdras  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E21_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="E21_1">1&#160;</span>The second book of the prophet <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Esdras, the son of <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Saraias, the son of Azarias, the son of Helchias, the son of <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sadamias, the son of Sadoc, the son of Achitob, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_2">2&#160;</span>The son of Achias, the son of Phinees, the son of Heli, the son of Amarias, the son of Aziei, the son of Marimoth, the son of Arna, the son of Ozias, the son of Borith, the son of Abisei, the son of Phinees, the son of Eleazar, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_3">3&#160;</span>The son of Aaron, of the tribe of Levi; which was captive in the land of <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the Medes, in the reign of Artexerxes king of the Persians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_4">4&#160;</span>And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_5">5&#160;</span>Go thy way, and <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>shew my people their sinful deeds, and their children their wickedness which they have done against me; that they may tell their children’s children: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_6">6&#160;</span>Because the sins of their fathers are increased in them: for they have forgotten me, and have offered unto strange gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_7">7&#160;</span>Am not I even he that <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>brought them out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage? but they have provoked me unto wrath, and despised my counsels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Pull thou off then the hair of thy head, and cast all evil upon them, for they have not been obedient unto my law, but <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>it is a rebellious people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>How long shall I forbear them, into whom I have done so much <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>good? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_10">10&#160;</span>Many kings have I destroyed for their sakes; <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Pharaoh with his servants and all his power have I smitten down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>All the nations have I destroyed before them, and in the east I have scattered the people of <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>two provinces, even <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>of Tyrus and Sidon, and have slain all their enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_12">12&#160;</span>Speak thou therefore unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>I led you through the sea and in the beginning gave you a large and safe <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>passage; I gave you <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Moses for a leader, and <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Aaron for a priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>I gave you light in a pillar of fire, and great wonders have I done among you; <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>yet have ye forgotten me, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_15">15&#160;</span>Thus saith the <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Almighty Lord, The <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>quails were as a token to you; I gave you tents for your safeguard: nevertheless ye murmured there, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_16">16&#160;</span>And triumphed not in my name for the destruction of your enemies, but ever to this day do ye yet murmur. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_17">17&#160;</span>Where are the <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>benefits that I have done for you? when ye were hungry and thirsty in the wilderness, did ye not cry unto me, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_18">18&#160;</span>Saying, <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Why hast thou brought us into this wilderness to kill us? <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>it had been better for us to have served the Egyptians, than to die in this wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_19">19&#160;</span>Then had I pity upon your mournings, and <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>gave you manna to eat; so <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>ye did eat angels’ bread. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>When ye were thirsty, did I not cleave the rock, and waters flowed out <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to your fill? for the heat I covered you with the leaves of the trees. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_21">21&#160;</span>I divided among you <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>a fruitful land, I cast out the Canaanites, the Pherezites, and the Philistines, before you: <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>what shall I yet do more for you? saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_22">22&#160;</span>Thus saith the <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Almighty Lord, When ye were in the wilderness, <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the river of the Amorites, being athirst, and blaspheming my name, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_23">23&#160;</span>I gave you not fire for your blasphemies, but <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>cast a tree in the water, and made the river sweet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_24">24&#160;</span>What shall I do unto thee, O Jacob? <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>thou, Juda, <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>wouldest not obey me: <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>I will turn me to other nations, and unto those will I give my name, that they may keep my statutes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Seeing ye have forsaken me, I will forsake you also; when ye desire me to be gracious unto you, I shall have no mercy upon you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Whensoever ye shall call upon me, I will not hear you: for ye have defiled your hands with blood, and <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>your feet are swift to commit manslaughter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_27">27&#160;</span>Ye have not as it were forsaken me, but your own selves, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_28">28&#160;</span>Thus saith the <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Almighty Lord, Have I not prayed you as a father his sons, as a mother her daughters, and a nurse her young babes, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_29">29&#160;</span>That ye would be my people, <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and I should be your God; that ye would be my children, and I should be your father? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>I gathered you together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings: but now, what shall I do unto you? I will cast you out from my face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>When ye offer unto me, I will turn my face from you: for your solemn feastdays, your new moons, and your circumcisions, have I forsaken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>I sent unto you my servants the prophets, whom ye have taken and slain, and torn their bodies in pieces, whose blood I will require of your hands, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_33">33&#160;</span>Thus saith the <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Almighty Lord, <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Your house is desolate, <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>I will cast you out <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a><a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>as the wind doth stubble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_34">34&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>your children shall not be fruitful; for they have despised my commandment, and done the thing that is an evil before me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_35">35&#160;</span>Your houses will I give to <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>a people that shall come; which not having heard of me yet shall believe me; to whom I have shewed no signs, yet they shall do that I have commanded them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_36">36&#160;</span>They have seen no prophets, yet they shall call their sins to remembrance, and acknowledge them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_37">37&#160;</span>I take to witness the grace of <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the people to come, whose little ones rejoice in gladness: and <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>though they have not seen me with bodily eyes, yet in spirit they believe the thing that I say. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_38">38&#160;</span>And now, <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>brother, behold what glory; and see <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the people <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>that come from the east: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_39">39&#160;</span>Unto whom I will give for leaders, <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Oseas, Amos, and Micheas, Joel, Abdias, and Jonas, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E21_40">40&#160;</span>Nahum, and Abacuc, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zachary, and Malachy, which is called also an <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>angel of the Lord.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E22_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_1">1&#160;</span>Thus saith the Lord, <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>I brought this people out of bondage, and <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>I gave them my commandments by menservants the prophets; whom they would not hear, but despised my counsels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_2">2&#160;</span>The mother that bare them saith unto them, Go your way, ye children; for <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>I am a widow and forsaken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_3">3&#160;</span>I brought you up with gladness; but with sorrow and heaviness have I lost you: for ye have sinned before the Lord your God, and done that thing that is evil before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_4">4&#160;</span>But what shall I now do unto you? <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>I am a widow and forsaken: go your way, O my children, and ask mercy of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_5">5&#160;</span>As for me, O father, I call upon thee for a witness over the mother of these children, which would not keep my covenant, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_6">6&#160;</span>That thou bring them to confusion, and <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>their mother to a spoil, <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>that there may be no offspring of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_7">7&#160;</span>Let them be scattered abroad among the heathen, let their names be put out of the earth: for they have despised my <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>covenant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_8">8&#160;</span>Woe be unto thee, Assur, <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>thou that hidest the unrighteous in thee! O thou wicked people, remember <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>what I did unto Sodom and Gomorrha; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Whose land lieth in clods of pitch and heaps of ashes: even so also will I do unto them that hear me not, saith the <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Almighty Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_10">10&#160;</span>Thus saith the Lord unto Esdras, Tell my people that I will give them the kingdom of Jerusalem, which I would have given unto <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Their glory also will I take unto me, and give these the <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>everlasting tabernacles, which I had prepared for <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_12">12&#160;</span>They shall have the <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>tree of life for an ointment of sweet savour; <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>they shall neither labour, nor be weary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_13">13&#160;</span>Go, and ye shall receive: pray for few days unto you, <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>that they may be shortened: <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the kingdom is already prepared for you: <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>watch. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Take heaven and earth to witness; for I have broken the evil in pieces, and created the good: for <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>I live, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Mother, embrace thy children, and <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bring them up with gladness, make their feet as fast as a pillar: <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_16">16&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>those that be dead will I raise up again from their places, and <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>bring them out of the graves: for I have known <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>my name in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_17">17&#160;</span>Fear not, thou <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>mother of the children: <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>for I have chosen thee, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_18">18&#160;</span>For thy help will I send my servants Esau and Jeremy, after whose counsel I have sanctified and prepared for thee <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>twelve trees laden with divers fruits, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_19">19&#160;</span>And as many fountains <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>flowing with milk and honey, and seven mighty mountains, whereupon there grow <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>roses and <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>lilies, whereby I will fill thy children with joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Do right to the widow, judge for the fatherless, give to the poor, defend the orphan, <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>clothe the naked, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_21">21&#160;</span>Heal the broken and the weak, <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>laugh not a lame man to scorn, defend the maimed, and let the blind man come into the sight of my clearness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_22">22&#160;</span>Keep the old and young within thy walls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Wheresoever thou findest the dead, <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>take them and bury them, and <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>I will give thee the first place in my resurrection. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_24">24&#160;</span>Abide still, O my people, and take thy rest, for thy quietness still come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_25">25&#160;</span>Nourish thy children, O thou <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>good nurse; stablish their feet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>As for the servants whom I have given thee, there shall not one of them perish; for I will require them from among thy number. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_27">27&#160;</span>Be not weary: for when the day of trouble and heaviness cometh, others shall weep and be sorrowful, but thou shalt be merry and have abundance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_28">28&#160;</span>The heathen shall envy thee, <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>but they shall be able to do nothing against thee, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>My hands shall cover thee, so that thy children shall not see <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>hell. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_30">30&#160;</span>Be joyful, O thou <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>mother, with thy children; for I will deliver thee, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_31">31&#160;</span>Remember thy children that sleep, for <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>I shall bring them out of the sides of the earth, and shew mercy unto them: for I am merciful, saith the Lord <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Almighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_32">32&#160;</span>Embrace thy children until I come and <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shew mercy unto them: for my wells run over, and my grace shall not fail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_33">33&#160;</span>I Esdras received a charge of the Lord upon the mount <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Oreb, that I should go unto Israel; but when I came unto them, they set me at nought, and despised the commandment of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_34">34&#160;</span>And therefore I say unto you, O ye heathen, that hear and understand, look for <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>your Shepherd, he shall give you everlasting <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>rest; for he is nigh at hand, <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>that shall come in the end of the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_35">35&#160;</span>Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the everlasting light shall shine upon you for evermore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_36">36&#160;</span>Flee <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the shadow of this world, receive the joyfulness of <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>your glory: I testify <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>my Saviour openly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_37">37&#160;</span>O receive the gift that is given you, and be glad, giving thanks unto him <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>that hath led you to the heavenly kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_38">38&#160;</span>Arise up and stand, behold <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the number of those that be <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>sealed <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the feast of the Lord; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_39">39&#160;</span>Which are departed from <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the shadow of the world, and <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>have received glorious garments of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_40">40&#160;</span>Take thy number, O Sion, and <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shut up those of thine <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>that are clothed in white, which have fulfilled the law of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_41">41&#160;</span><a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>The number of thy children, whom thou longedst for, is fulfilled: beseech the power of the Lord, that thy people, <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>which have been called from the beginning, may be hallowed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_42">42&#160;</span>I Esdras saw <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>upon the mount Sion <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a great people, whom I could not number, and they all praised the Lord with songs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_43">43&#160;</span>And in the midst of them there was a <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>young man of a high stature, taller than all the rest, and upon every one of their heads <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he set crowns, and was more exalted; which I marvelled at greatly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_44">44&#160;</span>So I asked <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the angel, and said, <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Sir, what are these? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_45">45&#160;</span>He answered and said unto me, These be they <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>that have put off the mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and have confessed the name of God: now <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>are they crowned, and <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>receive palms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_46">46&#160;</span>Then said I unto <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the angel, What <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>young person is it that crowneth them, and giveth them palms in their hands? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_47">47&#160;</span>So he answered and said unto me, <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>It is the Son of God, whom they have confessed in the world. Then began I greatly to commend them that stood so stiffly for the name of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E22_48">48&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the angel said unto me, Go thy way, and <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>tell my people what manner of things, and how great wonders of the Lord thy God, thou hast seen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E23_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_1">1&#160;</span>In the thirtieth year after <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the ruin of the city I was in Babylon, and lay troubled upon my bed, and <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>my thoughts came up over my heart: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_2">2&#160;</span>For I saw the desolation of Sion, and the wealth of them that dwelt at Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_3">3&#160;</span>And my spirit was sore moved, so that I began to speak words full of fear to the most High, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_4">4&#160;</span>O Lord, <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>who bearest rule, thou spakest at the beginning, when thou didst plant the earth, and that <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>thyself alone, and commandedst the people, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_5">5&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>gavest a body unto Adam without soul, which was the workmanship of thine hands, and <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>didst breathe into him the breath of life, and he was made living before thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_6">6&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>thou leadest him into paradise, which thy right hand had planted, before ever the earth came forward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_7">7&#160;</span>And unto him thou gavest commandment to love thy way: which he transgressed, and immediately <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>thou appointedst death in him and in his generations, of whom came nations, tribes, people, and kindreds, out of number. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_8">8&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>every people walked after their own will, and <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>did wonderful things before thee, and despised thy commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_9">9&#160;</span>And again in process of time <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>thou broughtest the flood upon those that dwelt in the world, and destroyedst them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_10">10&#160;</span>And it came to pass in every of them, that as death was to Adam, so was the flood to these. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_11">11&#160;</span>Nevertheless one of them thou leftest, namely, <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Noah with his household, of whom came all righteous men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_12">12&#160;</span>And it happened, that when they that dwelt upon the earth began to multiply, and had gotten them many children, and were a great people, they began again to be more ungodly than the first. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_13">13&#160;</span>Now when they lived so wickedly before thee, <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>thou didst choose thee a man from among them, whose name was <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Abraham. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Him thou lovedst, and unto him only thou shewedst thy will: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_15">15&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>madest an everlasting covenant with him, promising him that thou wouldest never forsake his seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_16">16&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>unto him thou gavest Isaac, and <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>unto Isaac also thou gavest Jacob and Esau. As for Jacob, <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>thou didst choose him to thee, and put by Esau: and so <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Jacob became a great multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_17">17&#160;</span>And it came to pass, that when thou leadest his seed out of Egypt, <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>thou broughtest them up to the mount Sinai. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_18">18&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>bowing the heavens, <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>thou didst set fast the earth, movedst the whole world, and <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>madest the depths to tremble, and <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>troubledst the men of that age. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_19">19&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>thy glory went through four gates, of fire, and of earthquake, and of wind, and of cold; that thou mightest give the law unto the seed of Jacob, <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and diligence unto the generation of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_20">20&#160;</span>And yet tookest thou not away from them a wicked heart, that thy law might bring forth fruit in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_21">21&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the first Adam bearing a wicked heart transgressed, and was overcome; and so be all they that are born of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_22">22&#160;</span>Thus infirmity was made permanent; and <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the law (also) in the heart of the people with <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the malignity of the root; <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>so that the good departed away, and the evil abode still. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_23">23&#160;</span>So the times passed away, and the years were brought to an end: then <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>didst thou raise thee up a servant, called David: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Whom thou commandedst to build a city unto thy name, and to offer incense and oblations unto thee therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_25">25&#160;</span>When this was done many years, then they that inhabited the city forsook thee, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_26">26&#160;</span>And in all things did even as Adam and all his generations had done: for they also had a wicked heart: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_27">27&#160;</span>And so thou gavest thy city over into the hands of thine enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Are their deeds then any better that inhabit Babylon, that they should therefore have the dominion over Sion? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_29">29&#160;</span>For when I came thither, and had seen impieties without number, then my soul saw many evildoers in <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>this thirtieth year, so that <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>my heart failed me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_30">30&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>I have seen how thou sufferest them sinning, and hast spared wicked doers: and hast destroyed thy people, and hast preserved thine enemies, and hast not signified it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_31">31&#160;</span>I do not <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>remember how this way may be left: <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Are they then of Babylon better than they of Sion? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_32">32&#160;</span>Or is there any other people that knoweth thee beside Israel? or what generation hath so believed thy covenants as Jacob? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_33">33&#160;</span>And yet their reward appeareth not, and their labour hath no fruit: for I have gone here and there through the heathen, and I see that they <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>flow in wealth, and think not upon thy commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_34">34&#160;</span>Weigh thou therefore our wickedness now in the balance, and their’s also that dwell the world; and so shall thy name no where be found but in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_35">35&#160;</span>Or when was it that they which dwell upon the earth have not sinned in thy sight? or what people have so kept thy commandments? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E23_36">36&#160;</span>Thou shalt find that Israel by name hath kept thy precepts; but not the heathen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E24_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_1">1&#160;</span>And the angel that was sent unto me, whose name was <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Uriel, gave me an answer, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_2">2&#160;</span>And said, Thy heart hath gone to far in this world, and <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>thinkest thou to comprehend the way of the most High? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_3">3&#160;</span>Then said I, Yea, my lord. And he answered me, and said, I am sent to shew thee <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>three ways, and to set forth three similitudes before thee: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_4">4&#160;</span>Whereof if thou canst declare me one, I will shew thee also the way that thou desirest to see, and I shall shew thee from whence the wicked heart cometh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_5">5&#160;</span>And I said, Tell on, my lord. Then said he unto me, Go thy way, weigh me the weight of the fire, or measure me the blast of the wind, or call me again the day that is past. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_6">6&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, What man is able to do that, that thou shouldest ask such things of me? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_7">7&#160;</span>And he said unto me, If I should ask thee how great dwellings are <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in the midst of the sea, or how many springs are in the beginning of the deep, or how many springs are above the firmament, or which are the outgoings of <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>paradise: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_8">8&#160;</span>Peradventure thou wouldest say unto me, I never went down into the deep, nor as yet into hell, neither did I ever climb up into heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_9">9&#160;</span>Nevertheless <a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>now have I asked thee but only of the fire and wind, and of the day wherethrough thou hast passed, and of things from which thou canst not be separated, and yet canst thou give me no answer of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_10">10&#160;</span>He said moreover unto me, Thine own things, and such as are grown up with thee, canst thou not know; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_11">11&#160;</span>How should <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>thy vessel then be able to comprehend the way of the Highest, and, the world being now outwardly corrupted to understand the <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>corruption that is evident in my sight? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_12">12&#160;</span>Then said I unto him, It were better that we were not at all, than that we should live still in wickedness, and to suffer, and not to know wherefore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_13">13&#160;</span>He answered me, and said, I went into a forest into a plain, and <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the trees took counsel, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_14">14&#160;</span>And said, Come, let us go and make war against the sea that it may depart away before us, and that we may make us more woods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_15">15&#160;</span>The floods of the sea also in like manner took counsel, and said, Come, let us go up and subdue the woods of the plain, that there also we may make us another country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_16">16&#160;</span>The thought of the wood was in vain, for <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the fire came and consumed it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_17">17&#160;</span>The thought of the floods of the sea came likewise to nought, for <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the sand stood up and stopped them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_18">18&#160;</span>If thou wert judge now betwixt these two, whom wouldest thou begin to justify? or whom wouldest thou condemn? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_19">19&#160;</span>I answered and said, Verily it is a foolish thought that they both have devised, for <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the ground is given unto the wood, and the sea also hath his place to bear his <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>floods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_20">20&#160;</span>Then answered he me, and said, Thou hast given a right judgment, but why judgest thou not thyself also? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_21">21&#160;</span>For like as <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the ground is given unto the wood, and the sea to his floods: even so <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a><a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>they that dwell upon the earth may understand nothing but that which is upon the earth: and he that dwelleth above the heavens may only understand the things that are above the height of the heavens. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_22">22&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, I beseech thee, O Lord, let me have understanding: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_23">23&#160;</span>For it was not my mind to be curious of the high things, but of such as pass by us daily, namely, <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>wherefore Israel is given up as a reproach to the heathen, and for what cause the people whom thou hast loved is given over unto ungodly nations, and why the law of our forefathers is brought to nought, and the written covenants come <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to none effect, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_24">24&#160;</span>And we pass away out of the world <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>as grasshoppers, and our life is astonishment and fear, and we are not worthy to obtain mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>What will he then do unto his name whereby we are called? of these things have I asked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_26">26&#160;</span>Then answered he me, and said, The more thou searchest, the more thou shalt marvel; for <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the world hasteth fast to pass away, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_27">27&#160;</span>And cannot comprehend the things that are promised to the righteous in time to come: for <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>this world is full of unrighteousness and infirmities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_28">28&#160;</span>But as concerning the things whereof thou askest me, I will tell thee; for the evil is sown, but the destruction thereof is not yet come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_29">29&#160;</span>If therefore that which is sown be not turned upside down, and if the place where the evil is sown pass not away, then cannot it come that is sown with good. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_30">30&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the grain of evil seed hath been sown in the heart of Adam from the beginning, and how much ungodliness hath it <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>brought up unto this time? and how much shall it yet <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>bring forth until the <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>time of threshing come? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_31">31&#160;</span>Ponder now by thyself, how great fruit of wickedness the grain of evil seed hath <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>brought forth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_32">32&#160;</span>And when the ears shall be cut down, which are without number, how great a floor shall they fill? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_33">33&#160;</span>Then I answered and said, How, and when shall these things come to pass? wherefore are our years <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>few and evil? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_34">34&#160;</span>And he answered me, saying, Do not thou hasten above <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the most Highest: for thy haste is in vain to be above him, for thou hast much exceeded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_35">35&#160;</span>Did not <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the souls also of the righteous ask question of these things in their <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>chambers, saying, <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>How long shall I hope on this fashion? when cometh the fruit of the floor of our reward? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_36">36&#160;</span>And unto these things <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Uriel the <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>archangel gave them answer, and said, <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Even when the number of seeds is filled in you: for he hath weighed the world in the balance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_37">37&#160;</span>By measure hath he measured the times; and by number hath he numbered the times; and he doth not move nor stir them, until the said measure be fulfilled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_38">38&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ww</a>O Lord that bearest rule, even we all are full of impiety. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_39">39&#160;</span>And for our sakes peradventure it is that the floors of the righteous are not filled, because of the sins of them that dwell upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_40">40&#160;</span>So he answered me, and said, Go thy way to a woman with child, and ask of her when she hath fulfilled her nine months, if her womb may keep the birth any longer within her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_41">41&#160;</span>Then said I, No, Lord, that can she not. And he said unto me, In the grave the <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>chambers of souls are like the womb of a woman: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_42">42&#160;</span>For like as a woman that travaileth maketh haste to escape the necessity of the travail: even so do these places haste to deliver those things that are committed unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_43">43&#160;</span>From the beginning, look, what thou desirest to see, it shall be shewed thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_44">44&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>If I have found favour in thy sight, and if it be possible, and if I be meet therefore, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_45">45&#160;</span>Shew me then whether there be more to come than is past, or <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>more past than is to come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_46">46&#160;</span>What is past I know, but what is for to come I know not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_47">47&#160;</span>And he said unto me, Stand up upon the right side, and I shall expound the similitude unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_48">48&#160;</span>So I stood, and saw, and, behold, an hot burning oven passed by before me: and it happened that when the flame was gone by I looked, and, behold, the smoke remained still. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_49">49&#160;</span>After this there passed by before me a watery cloud, and sent down much rain with a storm; and when the stormy rain was past, the drops remained still. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_50">50&#160;</span>Then said he unto me, Consider with thyself; as the rain is more than the drops, and as the fire is greater than the smoke; but the drops and the smoke remain behind: so <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>quantity which is past did more exceed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_51">51&#160;</span>Then I prayed, and said, <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>May I live, thinkest thou, until that time? or <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>what shall happen in those days? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E24_52">52&#160;</span>He answered me, and said, <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>As for the tokens whereof thou askest me, I may tell thee of them in part: but <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>as touching thy life, I am not sent to shew thee; for I do not know it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E25_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_1">1&#160;</span>Nevertheless <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>as coming the tokens, behold, the days shall come, that they which dwell upon earth <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall be taken in a great number, and the way of truth shall be hidden, and <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the land shall be barren of faith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_2">2&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>iniquity shall be increased above that which now thou seest, or that thou hast heard long ago. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_3">3&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the land, <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that thou seest now to have root, shalt thou see wasted suddenly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_4">4&#160;</span>But if the most High grant thee to live, thou shalt see <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>after the third trumpet that <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the sun shall suddenly shine again in the night, and the moon thrice in the day: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_5">5&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>blood shall drop out of wood, and <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the stone shall give his voice, and the people shall be troubled: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_6">6&#160;</span>And even he shall rule, whom they look not for that dwell upon the earth, and the fowls shall take their flight away together: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_7">7&#160;</span>And the Sodomitish sea shall cast out fish, and make a noise in the night, which many have not known: but they shall all hear the voice thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_8">8&#160;</span>There shall be a confusion also in many places, and the fire shall be oft <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sent out again, and the wild beasts shall change their places, and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_9">9&#160;</span>And salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and all friends shall destroy one another; then <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>shall wit hide itself, and understanding withdraw itself into his <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>secret chamber, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_10">10&#160;</span>And shall be sought of many, and yet not be found: then <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>shall unrighteousness and incontinency be multiplied upon earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_11">11&#160;</span>One land also shall ask another, and say, Is righteousness that maketh a man righteous gone through thee? And it shall say, No. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_12">12&#160;</span>At the same time shall men hope, but nothing obtain: they shall labour, but their ways shall not <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prosper. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>To shew thee such tokens I have leave; and if thou wilt pray again, and <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>weep as now, and <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>fast even days, thou shalt hear yet greater things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_14">14&#160;</span>Then I awaked, and an extreme fearfulness went through all my body, and my mind was troubled, <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>so that it fainted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_15">15&#160;</span>So the angel that was come to talk with me held me, <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>comforted me, and set me up upon my feet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_16">16&#160;</span>And in the second night it came to pass, that <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Salathiel the captain of the people came unto me, saying, Where hast thou been? and why is thy countenance so heavy? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_17">17&#160;</span>Knowest thou not that <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Israel is committed unto thee in the land of their captivity? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_18">18&#160;</span>Up then, and eat bread, and forsake us not, <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>as the shepherd that leaveth his flock in the hands of cruel wolves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_19">19&#160;</span>Then said I unto him, Go thy ways from me, and come not nigh me. And he heard what I said, and went from me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_20">20&#160;</span>And so <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>I fasted seven days, mourning and weeping, <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>like as <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Uriel the angel commanded me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_21">21&#160;</span>And after seven days so it was, that the thoughts of my heart were very grievous unto me again, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_22">22&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>my soul recovered the spirit of understanding, and I began to talk with the most High again, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>And said, O Lord that bearest rule, of every wood of the earth, and of all the trees thereof, thou hast ch<a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>osen thee one only vine: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_24">24&#160;</span>And of all lands of the whole world thou hast chosen thee <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>one pit: and of all the flowers thereof <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>one lily: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_25">25&#160;</span>And of all the depths of the sea thou hast filled thee <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>one river: and of all builded cities thou hast hallowed Sion unto thyself: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_26">26&#160;</span>And of all the fowls that are created thou hast named thee <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>one dove: and of all the cattle that are made thou hast provided thee <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>one sheep: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_27">27&#160;</span>And among all the multitudes of people thou hast gotten thee one people: and unto this people, <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>whom thou lovedst, thou gavest a law that is approved of all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_28">28&#160;</span>And now, O Lord, why hast thou given this one people over unto many? and <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>upon <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the one root hast thou prepared others, and why hast thou scattered thy <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>only one people among many? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_29">29&#160;</span>And they which did gainsay thy promises, and believed not thy covenants, have trodden them down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_30">30&#160;</span>If thou didst so much hate thy people, yet shouldest thou punish them with thine own hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_31">31&#160;</span>Now when I had spoken these words, the angel that came to me <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the night afore was sent unto me, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_32">32&#160;</span>And said unto me, Hear me, and I will instruct thee; hearken to the thing that I say, and I shall tell thee more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_33">33&#160;</span>And I said, Speak on, my Lord. Then said he unto me, Thou art sore troubled in mind for Israel’s sake: <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>lovest thou that people better than he that made them? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_34">34&#160;</span>And I said, No, Lord: but of very grief have I spoken: for <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>my reins pain me every hour, while I labour <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>to comprehend the way of the most High, and to seek out part of his judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_35">35&#160;</span>And he said unto me, Thou canst not. And I said, Wherefore, Lord? whereunto was I born then? or <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>why was not my mother’s womb then my grave, that I might not have seen the travail of Jacob, and the wearisome toil of the stock of Israel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_36">36&#160;</span>And he said unto me, Number me the things that are not yet come, gather me together the dross that are scattered abroad, make me the flowers green again that are withered, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_37">37&#160;</span>Open me the <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>places that are closed, and bring me forth the winds that in them are shut up, shew me the image of a voice: and then I will declare to thee the thing that thou labourest to know. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_38">38&#160;</span>And I said, <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>O Lord that bearest rule, who may know these things, but he <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>that hath not his dwelling with men? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_39">39&#160;</span>As for me, I am unwise: how may I then speak of these things whereof thou askest me? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_40">40&#160;</span>Then said he unto me, Like as thou canst do none of these things that I have spoken of, even so canst thou not find out my judgment, or in the end <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the love that I have promised unto my people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_41">41&#160;</span>And I said, Behold, O Lord, yet art thou nigh unto them that be reserved till the end: and what shall they do that have been before me, or we that be now, or they that shall come after us? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_42">42&#160;</span>And he said unto me, I will liken my judgment unto a ring: <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>like as there is no slackness of the last, even so there is no swiftness of the first. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_43">43&#160;</span>So I answered and said, Couldest thou not make those that have been made, and be now, and that are for to come, at once; <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>that thou mightest shew thy judgment the sooner? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_44">44&#160;</span>Then answered he me, and said, The creature may not haste above the maker; neither may the world hold them at once that shall be created therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_45">45&#160;</span>And I said, <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>As thou hast said unto thy servant, that thou, which givest life to all, hast given life at once to the creature that thou hast created, and the creature bare it: even so it might now also bear them that now be present at once. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_46">46&#160;</span>And he said unto me, Ask the womb of a woman, and say unto her, If thou bringest forth children, why dost thou it not together, but one after another? pray her therefore to bring forth ten children at once. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_47">47&#160;</span>And I said, She cannot: but must do it by distance of time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_48">48&#160;</span>Then said he unto me, Even so have I given the womb of the earth to those that be sown in it in their times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_49">49&#160;</span>For like as a young child may not bring forth the things that belong to the aged, even so have I disposed the world which I created. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_50">50&#160;</span>And I asked, and said, Seeing thou hast now given me the way, I will proceed to speak before thee: for our mother, of whom <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>thou hast told me that she is young, draweth now nigh unto age. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_51">51&#160;</span>He answered me, and said, Ask a woman that beareth children, and she shall tell thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_52">52&#160;</span>Say unto her, Wherefore are unto they whom thou hast now brought forth <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>like those that were before, but less of stature? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_53">53&#160;</span>And she shall answer thee, They that be born in the strength of youth are of one fashion, and they that are born in the time of age, when the womb faileth, are otherwise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_54">54&#160;</span>Consider thou therefore also, how that ye are less of stature than those that were before you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_55">55&#160;</span>And so are they that come after you less than ye, as the creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the strength of youth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E25_56">56&#160;</span>Then said I, Lord, I beseech thee, <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>if I have found favour in thy sight, shew thy servant <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>by whom thou visitest thy creature.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E26_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_1">1&#160;</span>And he said unto me, In the beginning, when the <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>earth was made, before the borders of the world stood, or ever the winds blew, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_2">2&#160;</span>Before it thundered and lightened, or ever the foundations of <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>paradise were laid, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_3">3&#160;</span>Before <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>the fair flowers were seen, or ever the moveable powers were established, before <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the innumerable multitude of angels were gathered together, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_4">4&#160;</span>Or ever the heights of the air were lifted up, before <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the measures of the firmament were named, or ever the chimneys in Sion were hot, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_5">5&#160;</span>And ere the present years were sought out, and or ever the inventions of them that now sin were turned, before they <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>were sealed that have <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>gathered faith <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>for a treasure: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_6">6&#160;</span>Then did I consider these things, and <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>they all were made through me alone, and through none other: by me also they shall be ended, and by none other. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_7">7&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, What shall be the <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>parting asunder of the times? or when shall be the end of the first, and the beginning of it that followeth? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_8">8&#160;</span>And he said unto me, From Abraham unto Isaac, when Jacob and Esau were born of him, <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Jacob’s hand held <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>first the heel of Esau. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_9">9&#160;</span>For Esau is the end of the world, and Jacob is the beginning of it that followeth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_10">10&#160;</span>The hand of man is betwixt the heel and the hand: other question, Esdras, ask thou not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_11">11&#160;</span>I answered then and said, <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>O Lord that bearest rule, <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>if I have found favour in thy sight, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_12">12&#160;</span>I beseech thee, shew thy servant the end of thy tokens, <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>whereof thou shewedst me part <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the last night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_13">13&#160;</span>So he answered and said unto me, Stand up upon thy feet, and hear a mighty sounding voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_14">14&#160;</span>And it shall be as it were a great <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>motion; but the place where thou standest shall not be moved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_15">15&#160;</span>And therefore when it speaketh be not afraid: for the word is of the end, and the foundation of the earth is understood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_16">16&#160;</span>And why? because the speech of these things trembleth and is moved: for it knoweth that the end of these things must be changed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_17">17&#160;</span>And it happened, that when I had heard it I stood up upon my feet, and hearkened, and, behold, there was a voice that spake, and <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the sound of it was like the sound of many waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_18">18&#160;</span>And it said, Behold, the days come, that I will begin to draw nigh, and <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>to visit them that dwell upon the earth, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_19">19&#160;</span>And will begin to make inquisition of them, what they be that have hurt unjustly with their unrighteousness, and when the affliction of Sion shall be fulfilled; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_20">20&#160;</span>And when the world, that shall begin to vanish away, shall be <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>finished, then will I shew these tokens: <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the books shall be opened before the firmament, and they shall see all together: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_21">21&#160;</span>And the children of a year old shall speak with their voices, the women with child shall bring forth untimely children of three or four months old, and they shall live, and be raised up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_22">22&#160;</span>And suddenly shall the sown places appear unsown, the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_23">23&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the trumpet shall give a sound, which when every man heareth, they shall be suddenly afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_24">24&#160;</span>At that time <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>shall friends <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>fight one against another like enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with those that dwell therein, the springs of the fountains shall stand still, and in three hours they shall not run. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Whosoever remaineth from all these that I have told thee shall escape, and <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>see my salvation, and the end of your world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_26">26&#160;</span>And the men <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>that are received shall see it, <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>who have not tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inhabitants shall be changed, and turned into another meaning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_27">27&#160;</span>For evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be quenched. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_28">28&#160;</span>As for faith, it shall flourish, corruption shall be overcome, and the truth, which hath been so long without fruit, shall be declared. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_29">29&#160;</span>And when he talked with me, behold, I looked by little and little upon him before whom I stood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_30">30&#160;</span>And these words said he unto me; I am come to shew thee the time of the night to come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>If thou wilt pray yet more, and <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>fast seven days again, I shall tell thee <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>greater things <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>by day than I have heard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_32">32&#160;</span>For thy voice is heard before the most High: for the Mighty hath seen thy righteous dealing, he hath seen also thy chastity, which thou hast had ever since thy youth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_33">33&#160;</span>And therefore hath he sent me to shew thee all these things, and to say unto thee, <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Be of good comfort and fear not </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_34">34&#160;</span>And hasten not with the times that are past, <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>to think vain things, that thou mayest not hasten from the latter times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_35">35&#160;</span>And it came to pass after this, <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>that I wept again, and fasted seven days in like manner, that I might fulfil the three weeks which he told me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_36">36&#160;</span><a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>And in the eighth night was my heart vexed within me again, and I began to speak before the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_37">37&#160;</span>For my spirit was greatly set on fire, and my soul was in distress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_38">38&#160;</span>And I said, O Lord, thou spakest from the beginning of the creation, even the first day, and saidst thus; <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Let heaven and earth be made; and thy word was a perfect work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_39">39&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>then was the spirit, and darkness and <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>silence were on every side; the sound of man’s voice was not yet formed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_40">40&#160;</span><a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Then commandedst thou a fair light to come forth <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>of thy treasures, that thy work might appear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_41">41&#160;</span><a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Upon the second day thou madest the spirit of the firmament, and commandedst it to part asunder, and to make a division betwixt the waters, that the one part might go up, and the other remain beneath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_42">42&#160;</span><a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Upon the third day thou didst command that the waters should be gathered in the seventh part of the earth: six parts hast thou dried up, and kept them, to the intent that of these some being planted of God and tilled might serve thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_43">43&#160;</span>For as soon as thy word went forth the work was made. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_44">44&#160;</span>For immediately there was <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>great and innumerable fruit, and many and divers pleasures for the taste, and <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>flowers of unchangeable colour, and odours of wonderful smell: and this was done the third day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_45">45&#160;</span><a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Upon the fourth day thou commandedst that the sun should shine, and the moon give her light, and the stars should be in order: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_46">46&#160;</span>And gavest them a charge to do <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>service unto man, that was to be made. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_47">47&#160;</span><a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Upon the fifth day thou saidst unto <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the seventh part, where the waters were gathered that it should bring forth living creatures, fowls and fishes: and so it came to pass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_48">48&#160;</span><a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>For the dumb water and without life brought forth living things at the commandment of God, that all people might praise thy wondrous works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_49">49&#160;</span>Then didst thou ordain two living creatures, the one thou calledst <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Enoch, and the other <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Leviathan; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_50">50&#160;</span>And didst separate the one from the other: for <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the seventh part, namely, where the water was gathered together, might not hold them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_51">51&#160;</span>Unto <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Enoch thou gavest <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>one part, which was dried up the third day, that he should dwell in the same part, wherein are <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>a thousand hills: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_52">52&#160;</span>But unto Leviathan thou gavest <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the seventh part, namely, the moist; and <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>hast kept him to be devoured of whom thou wilt, and when. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_53">53&#160;</span><a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Upon the sixth day thou gavest commandment unto the earth, that before thee it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and creeping things: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>And after these, Adam also, whom thou madest lord of all thy creatures: of him come we all, and the people also whom thou hast chosen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_55">55&#160;</span>All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>thou madest the world for our sakes </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_56">56&#160;</span>As for the other people, which also come of Adam, thou hast said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle: and hast likened the abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a vessel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_57">57&#160;</span>And now, O Lord, behold, these heathen, which have ever been reputed as nothing, have begun to be lords over us, and to devour us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_58">58&#160;</span>But we thy people, whom thou hast called <a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>thy firstborn, thy only begotten, and thy fervent lover, are given into their hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E26_59">59&#160;</span>If <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the world now be made for our sakes, why do we not possess an inheritance with the world? <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>how long shall this endure?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E27_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_1">1&#160;</span>And when I had made an end of speaking these words, there was sent unto me <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the angel which had been sent unto me the nights afore: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_2">2&#160;</span>And he said unto me, Up, Esdras, and hear the words that I am come to tell thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_3">3&#160;</span>And I said, Speak on, <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>my God. Then said he unto me, The sea is set in a wide place, that it might be deep and great. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_4">4&#160;</span>But put the case the entrance were narrow, and like a river; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_5">5&#160;</span>Who then could go into the sea to look upon it, and to rule it? if he went not through the narrow, how could he come into the broad? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_6">6&#160;</span>There is also another thing; A city is builded, and set upon a broad field, and is full of all good things: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_7">7&#160;</span>The entrance thereof is narrow, and is set in a <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dangerous place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand, and on the left a deep water: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_8">8&#160;</span>And one only path between them both, even between the fire and the water, so small that there could but one man go there at once. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_9">9&#160;</span>If this city now were given unto a man for an inheritance, if he never shall pass the danger set before it, how shall he receive this inheritance? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_10">10&#160;</span>And I said, It is so, Lord. Then said he unto me, Even so also is Israel’s portion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_11">11&#160;</span>Because <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>for their sakes I made the world: and <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>when Adam transgressed my statutes, then was decreed that now is done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_12">12&#160;</span>Then were the entrances of this world made narrow, <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>full of sorrow and travail: they are but few and evil, full of perils,: and very painful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_13">13&#160;</span>For the entrances of the <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>elder world were wide and sure, and brought <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>immortal fruit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_14">14&#160;</span>If then they that live labour not to enter these <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>strait and vain things, they can never <a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>receive those that are laid up for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_15">15&#160;</span>Now therefore why disquietest thou thyself, seeing thou art but a corruptible man? and why art thou moved, whereas thou art but mortal? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_16">16&#160;</span>Why hast thou not considered in thy mind this thing that is to come, rather than that which is present? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_17">17&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>O Lord that bearest rule, thou hast ordained <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>in thy law, that the righteous should inherit these things, but that the ungodly should perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_18">18&#160;</span>Nevertheless the righteous shall suffer strait things, and hope for wide: for they that have done wickedly have suffered the strait things, and yet shall not see the wide. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_19">19&#160;</span>And he said unto me. There is no judge above God, and none that hath understanding above the Highest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_20">20&#160;</span>For there be many that perish in this life, because they despise the law of God that is set before them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_21">21&#160;</span>For God hath given strait commandment to such as came, what they should do to live, even as they came, and what they should observe to avoid punishment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_22">22&#160;</span>Nevertheless they were not obedient unto him; but spake against him, and imagined vain things; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_23">23&#160;</span>And deceived themselves by their wicked deeds; and said of the most High, that he is not; and knew not his ways: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_24">24&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>his law have they despised, and denied his covenants; in his statutes have they not been faithful, and have not performed his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_25">25&#160;</span>And therefore, Esdras, <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>for the empty are empty things, and for the full are the full things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_26">26&#160;</span>Behold, the time shall come, that these tokens which I have told thee shall come to pass, and the bride shall appear, and she coming forth shall be seen, that now is withdrawn from the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_27">27&#160;</span>And whosoever is delivered from <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the foresaid evils shall see my wonders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_28">28&#160;</span>For my son Jesus shall be revealed with those that be with him, and they that remain shall rejoice within <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>four hundred years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>After these years shall my son Christ die, and all men that have life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_30">30&#160;</span>And the world shall be turned into <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the old silence seven days, like as in the <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>former judgments: so that no man shall remain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_31">31&#160;</span>And after seven days the world, that yet awaketh not, shall be raised up, and that shall die that is corrupt </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_32">32&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the earth shall restore those that are asleep in her, and so <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shall the dust those that dwell in silence, and the <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>secret places shall deliver those souls that were committed unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_33">33&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the most High shall appear upon the seat of judgment, and misery shall pass away, and the long suffering shall have an end: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_34">34&#160;</span>But judgment only shall remain, <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>truth shall stand, and <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>faith shall wax strong: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_35">35&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>the work shall follow, and <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the reward shall be shewed, and the good deeds shall be of force, and wicked deeds shall bear no rule. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_36">36&#160;</span>Then said I, <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Abraham prayed first for the Sodomites, and <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Moses for the fathers that sinned in the wilderness: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_37">37&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Jesus after him for Israel in the time of <a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Achan: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_38">38&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Samuel and <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>David for the destruction: and <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Solomon for them that should come to the sanctuary: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_39">39&#160;</span>And Helias <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>for those that received rain; and <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>for the dead, that he might live: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_40">40&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Ezechias for the people in the time of Sennacherib: and many for many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_41">41&#160;</span>Even so now, seeing corruption is grown up, and wickedness increased, and the righteous have prayed for the ungodly: wherefore shall it not be so now also? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_42">42&#160;</span>He answered me, and said, This present life is not the end where much glory doth abide; therefore have they prayed for the weak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_43">43&#160;</span>But the day of doom shall be the end of this time, and the beginning of <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the immortality for to come, <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>wherein corruption is past, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_44">44&#160;</span>Intemperance is at an end, <a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>infidelity is cut off, righteousness is grown, <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>and truth is sprung up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_45">45&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>shall no man be able to save him that is destroyed, nor to oppress him <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>that hath gotten the victory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_46">46&#160;</span>I answered then and said, This is my first and last saying, that it had been better not to have given the earth unto Adam: or else, when it was given him, to have restrained him from sinning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_47">47&#160;</span><a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>For what profit is it for men now in this present time to live in heaviness, and after death to look for punishment? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_48">48&#160;</span>O thou Adam, what hast thou done? for <a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>though it was thou that sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all that come of thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_49">49&#160;</span>For what profit is it unto us, if there be promised us an immortal time, whereas we have done <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the works that bring death? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_50">50&#160;</span>And that there is promised us an everlasting hope, whereas ourselves being most wicked are made vain? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_51">51&#160;</span>And that there are laid up for us dwellings of health and safety, whereas we have lived wickedly? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_52">52&#160;</span>And that the glory of the most High is kept to defend them which have led <a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a wary life, whereas we have walked in the most wicked ways of all? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_53">53&#160;</span>And that there should be shewed <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>a paradise, whose fruit endureth for ever, wherein is <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>security and <a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>medicine, since we shall not enter into it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_54">54&#160;</span>(For we have walked in unpleasant places.) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_55">55&#160;</span>And that <a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the faces of them which have used abstinence shall shine above the stars, whereas <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>our faces shall be blacker than darkness? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_56">56&#160;</span>For while we lived and committed iniquity, we considered not that we should begin to suffer for it after death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_57">57&#160;</span>Then answered he me, and said, This is the <a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>condition of the battle, which man that is born upon the earth shall fight; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_58">58&#160;</span>That, if he be overcome, he shall suffer <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>as thou hast said: but if he <a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>get the victory, <a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>he shall receive the thing that I say. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_59">59&#160;</span>For this is the life whereof Moses spake unto the people while he lived, saying, <a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Choose thee life, that thou mayest live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_60">60&#160;</span>Nevertheless they believed not him, nor yet the prophets after him, no nor me which have spoken unto them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_61">61&#160;</span>That there should not be such heaviness in their destruction, as <a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>shall be joy over them that are persuaded to salvation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_62">62&#160;</span>I answered then, and said, I know, Lord, that the most High is called merciful, in that he hath mercy upon them which are not yet come into the world, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_63">63&#160;</span>And upon those also that turn to his law; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_64">64&#160;</span>And that he is <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>patient, and long suffereth those that have sinned, as his creatures; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_65">65&#160;</span>And that he is bountiful, for he is ready to give where it needeth; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_66">66&#160;</span>And that he is of great mercy, for he multiplieth more and more mercies to them that are present, and that are past, and also to them which are to come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_67">67&#160;</span>For if he shall not multiply his mercies, the world would not <a href='#FN408' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>continue with them that inherit therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_68">68&#160;</span>And he pardoneth; <a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>for if he did not so of his goodness, that they which have committed iniquities might be eased of them, the ten thousandth part of men should not <a href='#FN410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>remain living. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_69">69&#160;</span>And being judge, if he should not forgive them that are <a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cured with his word, and put out the multitude of <a href='#FN412' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>contentions, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E27_70">70&#160;</span>There should be very few left peradventure in an innumerable multitude.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E28_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_1">1&#160;</span>And he answered me, saying, The most High hath made this world for many, <a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>but the world to come for few. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_2">2&#160;</span>I will tell thee a similitude, Esdras; As when thou askest the earth, it shall say unto thee, that it giveth much mould whereof earthen vessels are made, but little dust that gold cometh of: even so is the course of this present world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_3">3&#160;</span>There be <a href='#FN414' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>many created, but few shall be saved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_4">4&#160;</span>So answered I and said, Swallow then down, O my soul, understanding, and devour wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_5">5&#160;</span>For thou hast agreed to give ear, and art willing to prophesy: <a href='#FN415' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>for thou hast no longer space than only to live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_6">6&#160;</span>O Lord, if thou suffer not thy servant, that we may pray before thee, and <a href='#FN416' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou give us seed unto our heart, and culture to our understanding, that there may come fruit of it; how shall each man live that is corrupt, who beareth the place of a man? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_7">7&#160;</span>For thou art alone, and we all one workmanship of thine hands, <a href='#FN417' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>like as thou hast said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_8">8&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN419' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>when the body is fashioned now in the mother’s womb, and thou givest it members, thy creature is preserved in fire and water, and nine months doth thy workmanship endure thy creature which is created in her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_9">9&#160;</span>But that which keepeth and is kept shall both be preserved: and when the time cometh, the womb preserved delivereth up the things that grew in it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_10">10&#160;</span>For thou hast commanded out of the parts of the body, that is to say, out of the breasts, milk to be given, which is the fruit of the breasts, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_11">11&#160;</span>That the thing which is fashioned may be nourished for a time, till thou disposest it to thy mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_12">12&#160;</span>Thou broughtest it up with thy righteousness, and nurturedst it in thy law, and reformedst it with thy judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_13">13&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN420' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>thou shalt mortify it as thy creature, and quicken it as thy work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_14">14&#160;</span>If therefore <a href='#FN421' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>thou shalt destroy him which with so great labour was fashioned, it is an easy thing to be ordained by thy commandment, that the thing which was made might be preserved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_15">15&#160;</span>Now therefore, Lord, I will speak; touching man in general, thou knowest best; but touching thy people, for whose sake I am sorry; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_16">16&#160;</span>And for thine inheritance, for whose cause I mourn; and for Israel, for whom I am heavy; and for Jacob, for whose sake I am troubled; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore will I begin to pray before thee for myself and for them: for I see the falls of us that dwell in the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_18">18&#160;</span>But I have heard <a href='#FN422' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the swiftness of the judge which is to come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore hear my voice, and understand my words, and I shall speak before thee. This is the beginning of the words of Esdras, <a href='#FN423' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>before he was taken up: and I said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_20">20&#160;</span>O Lord, thou that dwellest in everlastingness which beholdest from above things in the heaven and in the air; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_21">21&#160;</span>Whose throne is inestimable; whose glory may not be comprehended; <a href='#FN424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>before whom the hosts of angels stand with trembling, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN425' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Whose service is conversant in wind and fire; whose word is true, and sayings constant; whose commandment is strong, and ordinance fearful; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN426' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Whose look drieth up the depths, and indignation <a href='#FN427' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>maketh the mountains to melt away; which the truth witnesseth: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_24">24&#160;</span>O hear the prayer of thy servant, and give ear to the petition of thy creature. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_25">25&#160;</span>For while I live I will speak, and so long as I have understanding I will answer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_26">26&#160;</span>O look not upon the sins of thy people; but on them which serve thee in truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_27">27&#160;</span>Regard not the wicked inventions of the heathen, but the desire of those that keep thy testimonies in afflictions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_28">28&#160;</span>Think not upon those that have walked feignedly before thee: but remember them, which according to thy will have known <a href='#FN428' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>thy fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_29">29&#160;</span>Let it not be thy will to destroy them which have lived like beasts; but to look upon them that have clearly taught thy law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_30">30&#160;</span>Take thou no indignation at them which are deemed worse than beasts; but love them that always put their trust in thy righteousness and glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_31">31&#160;</span>For we and our fathers <a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>do languish of such diseases: but because of us sinners <a href='#FN430' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>thou shalt be called merciful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_32">32&#160;</span>For if thou <a href='#FN431' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hast a desire to have mercy upon us, thou shalt be called <a href='#FN432' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>merciful, to us namely, that have no works of righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_33">33&#160;</span>For the just, which have many good works laid up with thee, <a href='#FN433' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>shall out of their own deeds receive reward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_34">34&#160;</span>For what is man, that thou shouldest take displeasure at him? or what is a corruptible generation, that thou shouldest be so bitter toward it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_35">35&#160;</span>For in truth <a href='#FN434' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>them is no man among them that be born, but he hath dealt wickedly; and among the faithful there is none which hath not done amiss. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_36">36&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN435' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>in this, O Lord, thy righteousness and thy goodness shall be declared, if thou be merciful unto them which have not the <a href='#FN436' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>confidence of good works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_37">37&#160;</span>Then answered he me, and said, Some things hast thou spoken aright, and according unto thy words it shall be. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_38">38&#160;</span>For indeed I will not think on <a href='#FN437' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the disposition of them which have sinned <a href='#FN438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>before death, <a href='#FN439' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>before judgment, before destruction: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_39">39&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN440' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>I will rejoice over <a href='#FN441' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the disposition of the righteous, and I will remember also their <a href='#FN442' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>pilgrimage, and the salvation, and the reward, that they shall have. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_40">40&#160;</span>Like as I have spoken now, so shall it come to pass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_41">41&#160;</span>For as the husbandman soweth much seed upon the ground, and planteth many trees, and yet the thing that is sown good in his season cometh not up, neither doth all that is planted take root: even so is it of them that are sown in the world; <a href='#FN443' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>they shall not all be saved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_42">42&#160;</span>I answered then and said, <a href='#FN444' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>If I have found grace, let me speak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_43">43&#160;</span>Like as the husbandman’s seed perisheth, if it come not up, and <a href='#FN445' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>receive not thy rain in due season; or if there come too much rain, and corrupt it: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_44">44&#160;</span>Even so perisheth man also, which is formed with thy hands, and <a href='#FN446' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>is called thine own image, because thou art like unto him, <a href='#FN447' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>for whose sake thou hast made all things, and <a href='#FN448' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>likened him unto the husbandman’s seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_45">45&#160;</span>Be not wroth with us but <a href='#FN449' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>spare thy people, and have mercy upon thine own inheritance: for thou art merciful unto thy creature. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_46">46&#160;</span>Then answered he me, and said, Things present are for the present, and things to cometh for such as be to come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_47">47&#160;</span>For thou comest far short <a href='#FN450' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>that thou shouldest be able to love my creature more than I: but I have ofttimes drawn nigh unto thee, and unto it, but never to the unrighteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_48">48&#160;</span>In this also thou art marvellous before the most High: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_49">49&#160;</span>In that thou hast humbled thyself, as it becometh thee, and hast not judged thyself worthy to be much glorified among the righteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_50">50&#160;</span>For many great miseries shall be done to them that <a href='#FN451' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in the latter time shall dwell in the world, because they have walked in great <a href='#FN452' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>pride. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_51">51&#160;</span>But understand thou for thyself, and seek out the glory for such as be like thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_52">52&#160;</span>For unto you is <a href='#FN453' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>paradise opened, <a href='#FN454' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the tree of life is planted, <a href='#FN455' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the time to come is prepared, plenteousness is made ready, <a href='#FN456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>a city is builded, and <a href='#FN457' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>rest is allowed, yea, perfect goodness and wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_53">53&#160;</span>The root of evil <a href='#FN458' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>is sealed up from you, weakness and the <a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>moth is hid from you, and corruption is fled into <a href='#FN460' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hell to be forgotten: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN461' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Sorrows are passed, and in the end is shewed the treasure of immortality. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_55">55&#160;</span>And therefore ask thou no more questions concerning the multitude of them that perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_56">56&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN462' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>when they had taken liberty, they despised the most High, thought scorn of his law, and forsook his ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_57">57&#160;</span>Moreover they have trodden down his righteous, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_58">58&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN463' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>said in their heart, that there is no God; yea, and that knowing they must die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_59">59&#160;</span>For as <a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the things aforesaid shalt receive you, so <a href='#FN465' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>thirst and pain are prepared for them: for <a href='#FN466' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>it was not his will that men should come to nought: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_60">60&#160;</span>But they which be created have <a href='#FN467' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>defiled the name of him that made them, and were <a href='#FN468' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>unthankful unto him which prepared life for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_61">61&#160;</span>And therefore <a href='#FN469' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>is my judgment now at hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_62">62&#160;</span>These things have I not shewed unto all men, but unto thee, and a few <a href='#FN470' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>yy</a>like thee. Then answered I and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E28_63">63&#160;</span>Behold, O Lord, now hast thou shewed me the multitude of the <a href='#FN471' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>wonders, which thou wilt begin to do <a href='#FN472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in the last times: but at what time, thou hast not shewed me.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E29_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_1">1&#160;</span>He answered me then, and said, Measure thou the time diligently in itself: and when thou seest part of the <a href='#FN473' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>signs past, which I have told thee before, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_2">2&#160;</span>Then shalt thou understand, that it is the very same time, wherein the Highest will begin to visit the world which he made. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore when there shall be seen <a href='#FN474' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>earthquakes and <a href='#FN475' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>uproars of the people in the world: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_4">4&#160;</span>Then shalt thou well understand, that the most High spake of those things from the days that were before thee, even from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_5">5&#160;</span>For like as all that is made in the world hath a beginning and an end, and the end is manifest: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_6">6&#160;</span>Even so the times also of the Highest have plain beginnings in wonder and powerful works, and endings in effects and <a href='#FN476' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>signs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_7">7&#160;</span>And every one that shall be saved, and shall be able to escape <a href='#FN477' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>by his works, and <a href='#FN478' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>by faith, whereby ye have believed, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_8">8&#160;</span>Shall be preserved from the said perils, and <a href='#FN479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>shall see my salvation in my land, and within my borders: for <a href='#FN480' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>I have sanctified them for me from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_9">9&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN481' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall they be in pitiful case, which now have abused my ways: and they that have cast them away despitefully shall dwell in torments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_10">10&#160;</span>For such as <a href='#FN482' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in their life have received benefits, and have not known me; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_11">11&#160;</span>And they that have loathed my law, <a href='#FN483' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>while they had yet liberty, and, when as yet <a href='#FN484' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>place of repentance was open unto them, understood not, but despised it; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_12">12&#160;</span>The same must know it <a href='#FN485' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>after death by pain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_13">13&#160;</span>And therefore be thou not curious how the ungodly shall be punished, and when: but enquire <a href='#FN486' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>how the righteous shall be saved, whose the world is, and <a href='#FN487' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>for whom the world is created. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_14">14&#160;</span>Then answered I and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_15">15&#160;</span>I have said before, and now do speak, and will speak it also hereafter, that <a href='#FN488' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>there be many more of them which perish, than of them which shall be saved: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_16">16&#160;</span>Like as a wave is greater than a drop. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_17">17&#160;</span>And he answered me, saying, Like as the field is, so is also the seed; as the flowers be, such are the colours also; such as the workman is, such also is the work; and as the husbandman is himself, so is his husbandry also: <a href='#FN489' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for it was the time of the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_18">18&#160;</span>And now when I prepared the world, which was not yet made, even for them to dwell in that now live, no man spake against me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_19">19&#160;</span>For then every one obeyed: <a href='#FN490' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but now the manners of them which are created in this world that is made are corrupted by a perpetual seed, and by a law which is unsearchable rid themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_20">20&#160;</span>So I considered the world, and, behold, there was peril because of the devices that were come into it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_21">21&#160;</span>And I saw, and <a href='#FN491' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>spared it greatly, and <a href='#FN492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>have kept me a <a href='#FN493' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>grape of the cluster, and <a href='#FN494' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>a plant of a great people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_22">22&#160;</span>Let <a href='#FN495' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the multitude perish then, which was born in vain; and let my <a href='#FN496' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>grape be kept, and my plant; for with great labour have I made it perfect. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_23">23&#160;</span>Nevertheless, if thou wilt cease <a href='#FN497' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>yet seven days more, (but thou shalt not fast in them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_24">24&#160;</span>But go into a field of flowers, where no house is builded, and <a href='#FN498' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>eat only the flowers of the field; taste no flesh, drink no wine, but <a href='#FN499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>eat flowers only;) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_25">25&#160;</span>And pray unto the Highest continually, then will I come and talk with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_26">26&#160;</span>So I went my way into the field which is called Ardath, like as he commanded me; and there I sat among the flowers, and did eat of the herbs of the field, and the meat of the same satisfied me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_27">27&#160;</span>After seven days I sat upon the grass, and my heart was vexed within me, <a href='#FN500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>like as before: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_28">28&#160;</span>And I <a href='#FN501' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>opened my mouth, and began to talk before the most High, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_29">29&#160;</span>O Lord, thou that shewest thyself unto us, <a href='#FN502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>thou wast shewed unto our fathers in the wilderness, in a place where no man <a href='#FN503' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>treadeth, in a barren place, when they came out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_30">30&#160;</span>And thou spakest saying, Hear me, O Israel; and mark my words, thou seed of Jacob. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_31">31&#160;</span>For, behold, I sow my law in you, and it shall bring fruit in you, and ye shall be honoured in it for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_32">32&#160;</span>But our fathers, which received the law, kept it not, and observed not thy ordinances: and <a href='#FN504' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>though the fruit of thy law did not perish, neither could it, for it was thine; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_33">33&#160;</span>Yet they that received it perished, because they kept not the thing that was sown in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_34">34&#160;</span>And, lo, it is a custom, when the ground hath received seed, or the sea a ship, or any vessel meat or drink, that, that being perished wherein it was sown or cast into, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_35">35&#160;</span>That thing also which was sown, or cast therein, or received, doth perish, and remaineth not with us: but with us it hath not happened so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_36">36&#160;</span>For we <a href='#FN505' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>that have received the law perish by sin, and our heart also which received it </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_37">37&#160;</span>Notwithstanding <a href='#FN506' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the law perisheth not, but remaineth in his force. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_38">38&#160;</span>And when I spake these things in my heart, I looked back with mine eyes, and upon the right side I saw <a href='#FN507' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a woman, and, behold, she mourned and wept with a loud voice, and was much grieved in heart, and <a href='#FN508' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>her clothes were rent, and she had <a href='#FN509' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>ashes upon her head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_39">39&#160;</span><a href='#FN510' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Then let I my thoughts go that I was in, and turned me unto her, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_40">40&#160;</span>And said unto her, Wherefore weepest thou? why art thou so grieved in thy mind? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_41">41&#160;</span>And she said unto me, <a href='#FN511' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Sir, let me alone, that I may bewail myself, and add unto my sorrow, for I <a href='#FN512' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>am sore vexed in my mind, and brought very low. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_42">42&#160;</span>And I said unto her, What aileth thee? tell me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_43">43&#160;</span>She said unto me, I thy servant have been barren, and had no child, though I had an husband thirty years, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_44">44&#160;</span>And those thirty years I did nothing else day and night, and every hour, but <a href='#FN513' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>make my, prayer to the Highest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_45">45&#160;</span>After thirty years God heard me thine handmaid, looked upon my misery, considered my trouble, and gave me a son: and I was very glad of him, so was my husband also, and all my neighbours: and we gave great honour unto the Almighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_46">46&#160;</span>And I nourished him with great travail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E29_47">47&#160;</span>So when he grew up, and came to the time that he should have a wife, <a href='#FN514' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>I made a feast.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E210_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_1">1&#160;</span>And it so came to pass, that when my son was entered into his wedding chamber, he fell down, and died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_2">2&#160;</span>Then we all overthrew the lights, and <a href='#FN515' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>all my <a href='#FN516' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neighbours rose up to comfort me: so I took my rest unto the second day at night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_3">3&#160;</span>And it came to pass, when they had all left off to comfort me, to the end I might be quiet; then rose I up by night and fled, and came hither into this field, as thou seest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_4">4&#160;</span>And I do now purpose not to return into the city, but here to stay, and neither to eat nor drink, but continually to mourn and to fast until I die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN517' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Then left I the <a href='#FN518' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>meditations wherein I was, and spake to her in anger, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_6">6&#160;</span>Thou foolish woman above all other, seest thou not our mourning, and what happeneth unto us? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_7">7&#160;</span>How that Sion our mother is full of all heaviness, and <a href='#FN519' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>much humbled, mourning very sore? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_8">8&#160;</span>And now, seeing we all mourn and are sad, for we are all in heaviness, art thou grieved for one son? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_9">9&#160;</span>For ask the earth, and she shall tell thee, that it is she which ought to mourn for the fall of so many that grow upon her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_10">10&#160;</span>For out of her came all at the first, and out of her shall all others come, and, behold, they walk almost all into destruction, and a multitude of them is utterly <a href='#FN520' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rooted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_11">11&#160;</span>Who then should make more mourning than she, that hath lost so great a multitude; and not thou, which art sorry but for one? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_12">12&#160;</span>But if thou sayest unto me, My lamentation is not like the earth’s, because I have lost the fruit of my womb, which I brought forth with pains, and bare with sorrows; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN521' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>But the earth not so: for the multitude present in it according to the course of the earth is gone, as it came: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_14">14&#160;</span>Then say I unto thee, Like as thou hast brought forth with labour; even so the earth also hath given her fruit, namely, man, ever since the beginning unto him that made her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_15">15&#160;</span>Now therefore keep thy sorrow to thyself, and bear with a good courage that which hath befallen thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_16">16&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN522' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>if thou shalt acknowledge the determination of God to be just, thou shalt both receive thy son in time, and shalt be commended among women. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_17">17&#160;</span>Go thy way then into the city to thine husband. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_18">18&#160;</span>And she said unto me, That will I not do: <a href='#FN523' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>I will not go into the city, but here will I die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_19">19&#160;</span>So I proceeded to speak further unto her, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_20">20&#160;</span>Do not so, but be counselled. by me: for how many are the adversities of Sion? be comforted in regard of the sorrow of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_21">21&#160;</span>For thou seest that <a href='#FN524' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>our sanctuary is laid waste, <a href='#FN525' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>our altar broken down, <a href='#FN526' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>our temple destroyed; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_22">22&#160;</span>Our psaltery is laid on the ground, our song is put to silence, our rejoicing is at an end, <a href='#FN527' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the light of our candlestick is put out, <a href='#FN528' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the ark of our covenant is spoiled, <a href='#FN529' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>our holy things are defiled, and the name that is called upon us is almost profaned: our children are put to shame, our priests are burnt, our Levites are gone into captivity, <a href='#FN530' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>our virgins are defiled, and <a href='#FN531' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>our wives ravished; our righteous men carried away, our little ones destroyed, our young men are brought in bondage, and our strong men are become weak; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_23">23&#160;</span>And, which is the greatest of all, <a href='#FN532' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the seal of Sion hath now lost her honour; for <a href='#FN533' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>she is delivered into <a href='#FN534' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the hands of them that hate us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_24">24&#160;</span>And therefore shake off thy great heaviness, and put away the multitude of sorrows, that the Mighty may be merciful unto thee again, and the Highest shall give thee rest and ease from thy labour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_25">25&#160;</span>And it came to pass while I was talking with her, behold, her face upon a sudden shined exceedingly, and her countenance glistered, so that I was afraid of her, and mused what it might be. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_26">26&#160;</span>And, behold, suddenly she made a great cry very fearful: so that the earth shook at the noise of the woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_27">27&#160;</span>And I looked, and, behold, the woman appeared unto me no more, but there was <a href='#FN535' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>a city builded, and a large place shewed itself from the foundations: then was I afraid, and cried with a loud voice, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_28">28&#160;</span>Where is <a href='#FN536' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Uriel the angel, who came unto me at the first? for he hath caused me to fall <a href='#FN537' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>into many trances, and mine end is turned into corruption, and my prayer to rebuke. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_29">29&#160;</span>And as I was speaking these words behold, he came unto me, and looked upon me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_30">30&#160;</span>And, lo, I lay as one that had been dead, and mine understanding was taken from me: and he took me by the right hand, and <a href='#FN538' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>comforted me, and <a href='#FN539' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>set me upon my feet, and said unto me, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_31">31&#160;</span>What aileth thee? and why art thou so disquieted? and why is thine understanding troubled, and the thoughts of thine heart? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_32">32&#160;</span>And I said, Because thou hast forsaken me, and yet I <a href='#FN540' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>did according to thy words, and I <a href='#FN541' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>went into the field, and, lo, I have seen, and yet see, that I am not able to express. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_33">33&#160;</span>And he said unto me, Stand up manfully, and I will advise thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_34">34&#160;</span>Then said I, Speak on, my lord, in me; only forsake me not, lest I die frustrate of my hope. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_35">35&#160;</span>For I have seen that I knew not, and hear that I do not know. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_36">36&#160;</span>Or is my sense deceived, or my soul in a dream? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_37">37&#160;</span>Now therefore I beseech thee that thou wilt shew thy servant of this <a href='#FN542' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>vision. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_38">38&#160;</span>He answered me then, and said, Hear me, and I shall inform thee, and tell thee wherefore thou art afraid: for the Highest will reveal many secret things unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_39">39&#160;</span>He hath seen that thy <a href='#FN543' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>way is right: for that thou sorrowest continually for thy people, and makest great lamentation for Sion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_40">40&#160;</span>This therefore is the meaning of the vision which thou lately sawest: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_41">41&#160;</span><a href='#FN544' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Thou sawest a woman mourning, and thou begannest to comfort her: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_42">42&#160;</span>But now seest thou the likeness of the woman no more, but <a href='#FN545' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>there appeared unto thee a city builded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_43">43&#160;</span>And whereas she told thee of the death of her son, this is the <a href='#FN546' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>solution: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_44">44&#160;</span>This woman, whom thou sawest is Sion: and whereas she said unto thee, even she whom thou seest as a city builded, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_45">45&#160;</span>Whereas, I say, she said unto thee, <a href='#FN547' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>that she hath been thirty years barren: those are the thirty years wherein there was no offering made in her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_46">46&#160;</span>But after thirty years Solomon builded the city and <a href='#FN548' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>offered offerings: and then bare the barren a son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_47">47&#160;</span>And whereas she told thee that she nourished him with labour: that was the dwelling in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_48">48&#160;</span>But whereas she said unto thee, That my son coming into his marriage chamber <a href='#FN549' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>happened to have a fail, and died: this was the destruction that came to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_49">49&#160;</span>And, behold, <a href='#FN550' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>thou sawest her likeness, and because she mourned for her son, thou begannest to comfort her: and of these things which have chanced, these are to be opened unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_50">50&#160;</span>For now the most High seeth that thou art grieved unfeignedly, and sufferest from thy whole heart for her, so hath he shewed thee the brightness of her glory, and the comeliness of her beauty: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_51">51&#160;</span>And therefore <a href='#FN551' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>I bade thee remain in the field where no house was builded: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_52">52&#160;</span>For I knew that the Highest <a href='#FN552' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>would shew this unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_53">53&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN553' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>I commanded thee to go into the field, where no foundation of any building was. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_54">54&#160;</span>For in the place wherein the Highest <a href='#FN554' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>beginneth to shew his city, there can no man’s building be able to stand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_55">55&#160;</span>And therefore fear not, let not thine heart be affrighted, but go thy way in, and <a href='#FN555' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>see the beauty and greatness of the building, as much as thine eyes be able to see: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_56">56&#160;</span>And then shalt thou hear as much as thine ears may comprehend. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_57">57&#160;</span>For thou art blessed above many other, and <a href='#FN556' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>art called with the Highest; and so are but few. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_58">58&#160;</span>But to morrow at night thou shalt remain here; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E210_59">59&#160;</span>And so shall the Highest shew thee visions of the <a href='#FN557' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>high things, which the most High will do unto them that dwell upon the earth <a href='#FN558' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>in the last days. So I slept that night and another, like as he commanded me.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E211_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_1">1&#160;</span>Then saw I a dream, and, behold, there came up <a href='#FN559' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>from the sea <a href='#FN560' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>an eagle, which had twelve feathered wings, and three heads. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_2">2&#160;</span>And I saw, and, behold, she spread her wings over all the earth, and all the winds of the air blew on her, and were gathered together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_3">3&#160;</span>And I beheld, and out of her feathers there grew other <a href='#FN561' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>contrary feathers; and they became little feathers and small. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_4">4&#160;</span>But her heads were at rest: the head in the midst was greater than the other, yet rested <a href='#FN562' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it with the residue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover I beheld, and, lo, the eagle flew with her feathers, and reigned upon earth, and over them that dwelt therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_6">6&#160;</span>And I saw that all things under heaven were subject unto her, and no man spake against her, no, not one creature upon earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_7">7&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, the eagle rose upon her talons, and spake to her feathers, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_8">8&#160;</span>Watch not all at once: sleep every one in his own place, and watch by course: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_9">9&#160;</span>But let the heads be preserved for the last. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_10">10&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, the voice went not out of her heads, but from the midst of her body. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_11">11&#160;</span>And I numbered her <a href='#FN563' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>contrary feathers, and, behold, there were <a href='#FN564' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>eight of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_12">12&#160;</span>And I looked, and, behold, <a href='#FN565' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>on the right side there arose one feather, and reigned over all the earth; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_13">13&#160;</span>And so it was, that when it reigned, the end of it came, and <a href='#FN566' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the place thereof appeared no more: so the next following stood up. and reigned, and had a great time; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_14">14&#160;</span>And it happened, that when it reigned, the end of it came also, like as the first, so that it appeared no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_15">15&#160;</span>Then came there a voice unto it, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_16">16&#160;</span>Hear thou that hast borne rule over the earth so long: this I say unto thee, before thou beginnest to appear no more, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_17">17&#160;</span>There shall none after thee attain unto thy time, neither unto the half thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_18">18&#160;</span>Then arose the third, and reigned as the other before, and appeared no more also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_19">19&#160;</span>So went it with all the residue one after another, as that every one reigned, and then appeared no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_20">20&#160;</span>Then I beheld, and, lo, in process of time the feathers that followed stood up <a href='#FN567' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>upon the right side, that they might rule also; and some of them ruled, but within a while they appeared no more: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_21">21&#160;</span>For some of them were set up, but ruled not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_22">22&#160;</span>After this I looked, and, behold, <a href='#FN568' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the twelve feathers appeared no more, nor the <a href='#FN569' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>two <a href='#FN570' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>little feathers: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_23">23&#160;</span>And there was no more upon the eagle’s body, but three <a href='#FN571' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>heads that rested, and <a href='#FN572' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>six <a href='#FN573' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>little wings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_24">24&#160;</span>Then saw I also that two little feathers divided themselves from the six, and remained under the head that was upon the right side: for <a href='#FN574' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the four continued <a href='#FN575' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in their place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_25">25&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, <a href='#FN576' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the feathers that were under the wing thought to set up themselves and to have the rule. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_26">26&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, there was <a href='#FN577' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>one set up, but shortly it appeared no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_27">27&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN578' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the second was sooner away than the first. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_28">28&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, <a href='#FN579' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the two that remained thought also in themselves to reign: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_29">29&#160;</span>And when they so thought, behold, there awaked one of <a href='#FN580' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the heads that were at rest, namely, it that was in the midst; for that was greater than the two other heads. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_30">30&#160;</span>And then I saw that the two other heads were joined with it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_31">31&#160;</span>And, behold, the head was turned <a href='#FN581' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>with them that were with it, and did eat up <a href='#FN582' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the two <a href='#FN583' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>feathers under the wing that would have reigned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_32">32&#160;</span>But this head put the whole earth in fear, and bare rule in it over all those that dwelt upon the earth <a href='#FN584' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>with much oppression; and it had the governance of the world more than all the wings that had been. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_33">33&#160;</span>And after this I beheld, and, lo, the head that was in the midst suddenly appeared no more, <a href='#FN585' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>like as the wings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_34">34&#160;</span>But there remained the two heads, which also in like sort ruled upon the earth, and over those that dwelt therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_35">35&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, the head upon the right side devoured it that was upon the left side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_36">36&#160;</span>Then I head a voice, which said unto me, Look before thee, and consider the thing that thou seest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_37">37&#160;</span>And I beheld, and lo, as it were a roaring <a href='#FN586' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>lion chased out of the wood: and I saw that he sent out a man’s voice unto the eagle, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_38">38&#160;</span>Hear thou, I will talk with thee, and the Highest shall say unto thee, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_39">39&#160;</span>Art not thou it that remainest of <a href='#FN587' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the four beasts, whom I made to reign in my world, that the end of their times might come through them? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_40">40&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN588' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the fourth came, and overcame all the beasts that were past, and had power over the world with great fearfulness, and over <a href='#FN589' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the whole compass of the earth <a href='#FN590' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>with much wicked oppression; and so long time dwelt he upon the earth with deceit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_41">41&#160;</span>For the earth hast thou not judged with truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_42">42&#160;</span>For thou hast afflicted the meek, thou hast hurt the peaceable, thou hast loved liars, and destroyed the dwellings of them that brought forth fruit, and hast cast down the walls of such as did thee no harm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_43">43&#160;</span>Therefore is thy wrongful dealing come up unto the Highest, and thy pride unto the Mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_44">44&#160;</span>The Highest also hath looked upon the proud times, and, behold, they are ended, and his abominations are fulfilled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_45">45&#160;</span>And therefore appear no more, thou eagle, nor <a href='#FN591' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>thy horrible wings, nor <a href='#FN592' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>thy wicked feathers nor <a href='#FN593' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>thy malicious heads, nor thy hurtful <a href='#FN594' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>claws, nor all thy vain body: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E211_46">46&#160;</span>That all the earth <a href='#FN595' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>may be refreshed, and may return, being delivered from thy violence, and that she may hope for the judgment and mercy of him that made her.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E212_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_1">1&#160;</span>And it came to pass, whiles the lion spake these words unto the eagle, I saw, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_2">2&#160;</span>And, behold, <a href='#FN596' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the head that remained and <a href='#FN597' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the four wings appeared no more, and <a href='#FN598' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the two went unto it and set themselves up to reign, and <a href='#FN599' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>their kingdom was small, and fill of uproar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_3">3&#160;</span>And I saw, and, behold, they appeared no more, and the whole body of the eagle was burnt so that the earth was in great fear: then awaked I out of the trouble and <a href='#FN600' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>trance of my mind, and from great fear, and said unto my spirit, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_4">4&#160;</span>Lo, this hast thou done unto me, in that thou searchest out the ways of the Highest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_5">5&#160;</span>Lo, yet am I weary in my mind, and very weak in my spirit; and little strength is there in me, for the great fear wherewith I was afflicted this night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore will I now beseech the Highest, that he will comfort me unto the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_7">7&#160;</span>And I said, <a href='#FN601' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Lord that bearest rule, <a href='#FN602' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>if I have found grace before thy sight, and if I am justified with thee before many others, and if my prayer indeed be come up before thy face; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_8">8&#160;</span>Comfort me then, and shew me thy servant the interpretation and plain difference of this fearful vision, that thou mayest perfectly comfort my soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN603' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>For <a href='#FN604' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>thou hast judged me worthy to shew me <a href='#FN605' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the last times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_10">10&#160;</span>And he said unto me, This is the interpretation of the vision: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN606' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>The eagle, whom thou sawest come up from the sea, is the kingdom which was seen <a href='#FN607' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>in the vision of thy brother Daniel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_12">12&#160;</span>But it was not expounded unto him, therefore now I declare it unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, the days will come, that there shall rise up a kingdom upon earth, and it shall be feared above all the kingdoms that were before it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_14">14&#160;</span>In the same <a href='#FN608' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>shall twelve kings reign, one after another: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_15">15&#160;</span>Whereof <a href='#FN609' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the second shall begin to reign, and shall have more time than any of the twelve. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_16">16&#160;</span>And this do the twelve wings signify, which thou sawest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_17">17&#160;</span>As for the voice which thou heardest speak, and <a href='#FN610' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>that thou sawest <a href='#FN611' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>not to go out from the heads but from the midst of the body thereof, this is the interpretation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_18">18&#160;</span>That after the time of that kingdom there shall arise great strivings, and it shall stand in peril of failing: nevertheless it shall not then fall, but shall be restored again to his beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_19">19&#160;</span>And whereas thou sawest <a href='#FN612' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the eight small under feathers sticking to her wings, this is the interpretation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_20">20&#160;</span>That in him there shall arise eight kings, whose times shall be but small, and their years swift. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_21">21&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN613' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>two of them shall perish, the middle time approaching: <a href='#FN614' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>four shall be kept until their end begin to approach: but <a href='#FN615' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>two shall be kept unto the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_22">22&#160;</span>And whereas thou sawest <a href='#FN616' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>three heads resting, this is the interpretation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN617' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>In his last days shall the most High raise up three kingdoms, and renew many things therein, and they shall have the dominion of the earth, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_24">24&#160;</span>And of those that dwell therein, <a href='#FN618' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>with much oppression, above all those that were before them: therefore are they called the heads of the eagle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_25">25&#160;</span>For these are they that shall accomplish his wickedness, and that shall finish his last end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_26">26&#160;</span>And whereas thou sawest that <a href='#FN619' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the great head appeared no more, it signifieth that one of them shall die upon his bed, and yet with pain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_27">27&#160;</span>For the two that remain shall be slain with the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_28">28&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN620' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the sword of the one shall devour the other: but at the last <a href='#FN621' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>shall he fall through the sword himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_29">29&#160;</span>And whereas thou sawest <a href='#FN622' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>two feathers under the wings passing over the head that is on the right side; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_30">30&#160;</span>It signifieth that these are they, whom the Highest <a href='#FN623' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>hath kept unto their end: this is <a href='#FN624' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the small kingdom and full of trouble, as thou sawest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_31">31&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN625' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the lion, whom thou sawest rising up out of the wood, and roaring, and speaking to the eagle, and rebuking her for her unrighteousness with all the words which thou hast heard; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_32">32&#160;</span>This is the <a href='#FN626' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>anointed, which the Highest hath kept for them and for their wickedness unto the end: he shall reprove them, and shall upbraid them with their cruelty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_33">33&#160;</span>For he shall set them before him alive in judgment, and shall rebuke them, and correct them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_34">34&#160;</span>For the rest of my people shall he deliver with mercy, those that have been pressed upon my borders, and he shall make them joyful until the coming of the day of judgment, <a href='#FN627' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>whereof I have spoken unto thee from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_35">35&#160;</span>This is the dream that thou sawest, and these are the interpretations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_36">36&#160;</span>Thou only hast been meet to know this secret of the Highest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_37">37&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN628' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>write all these things that thou hast seen in a book, and <a href='#FN629' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>hide them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_38">38&#160;</span>And teach them to the wise of the people, whose hearts thou knowest may comprehend and keep these secrets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_39">39&#160;</span>But wait thou here thyself yet <a href='#FN630' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>seven days more, that it may be shewed thee, whatsoever it pleaseth the Highest to declare unto thee. And with that he went his way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_40">40&#160;</span>And it came to pass, when all the people saw that the seven days were past, and I not come again into <a href='#FN631' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the city, they gathered them all together, from the least unto the greatest, and came unto me, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_41">41&#160;</span>What have we offended thee? and what evil have we done against thee, that thou forsakest us, and sittest here in this place? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_42">42&#160;</span>For of all the <a href='#FN632' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets thou only art left us, <a href='#FN633' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>as a cluster of the vintage, and <a href='#FN634' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>as a candle in a dark place, and as <a href='#FN635' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>a haven or ship preserved from the tempest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_43">43&#160;</span>Are not the evils which are come to us sufficient? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_44">44&#160;</span>If thou shalt forsake us, <a href='#FN636' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>how much better had it been for us, if <a href='#FN637' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>we also had been burned in the midst of Sion? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_45">45&#160;</span><a href='#FN638' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>For we are not better than they that died there. And they wept with a loud voice. Then answered I them, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_46">46&#160;</span>Be of good comfort, O Israel; and be not heavy, thou house of Jacob: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_47">47&#160;</span>For the Highest hath you in remembrance, and the Mighty hath not forgotten you in temptation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_48">48&#160;</span>As for me, I have not forsaken you, neither am I departed from you: but am come into this place, to pray for the desolation of Sion, and that I might seek mercy for the low estate of your sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_49">49&#160;</span>And now go your way home every man, and after these days will I come unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_50">50&#160;</span>So the people went their way into the city, like as I commanded them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E212_51">51&#160;</span>But I remained still in the field seven days, <a href='#FN639' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>as the angel commanded me; and <a href='#FN640' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>did eat only in those days of the flowers of the field, and had my meat of the herbs.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E213_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_1">1&#160;</span>And it came to pass <a href='#FN641' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>after seven days, I dreamed a dream by night: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_2">2&#160;</span>And, lo, there arose <a href='#FN642' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a wind from the sea, that it moved all the waves thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_3">3&#160;</span>And I beheld, and, lo, that man waxed strong with the <a href='#FN643' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN644' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>thousands of heaven: and when he turned his countenance to look, all the things trembled that were seen under him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_4">4&#160;</span>And whensoever the voice went out of his mouth, all they burned that heard his voice, like as the earth faileth when it feeleth the fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_5">5&#160;</span>And after this I beheld, and, lo, there was gathered together a multitude of men, out of number, from the four winds of the heaven, to subdue the man that came out of the sea </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_6">6&#160;</span>But I beheld, and, lo, he had graved himself a great mountain, and flew up upon it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_7">7&#160;</span>But I would have seen the region or place whereout the hill was graven, and I could not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_8">8&#160;</span>And after this I beheld, and, lo, all they which were gathered together to subdue him were sore afraid, and yet durst fight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_9">9&#160;</span>And, lo, as he saw the violence of the multitude that came, he neither lifted up his hand, nor held sword, nor any instrument of war: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_10">10&#160;</span>But only I saw that he sent out of his mouth as it had been a blast of fire, and out of his lips a flaming breath, and out of his tongue he cast out sparks and tempests. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_11">11&#160;</span>And they were all mixed together; the blast of fire, the flaming breath, and the great tempest; and fell with violence upon the multitude which was prepared to fight, and burned them up every one, so that upon a sudden of an innumerable multitude nothing was to be perceived, but only dust and smell of smoke: when I saw this I was afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_12">12&#160;</span>Afterward saw I the same man come down from the mountain, and call unto him another peaceable Multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_13">13&#160;</span>And there came much people unto him, whereof some were glad, some were sorry, <a href='#FN645' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>and some of them were bound, and other some brought <a href='#FN646' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of them that were offered: then was I sick through great fear, and I awaked, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_14">14&#160;</span>Thou hast shewed thy servant these wonders from the beginning, and <a href='#FN647' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>hast counted me worthy that thou shouldest receive my prayer: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_15">15&#160;</span>Shew me now yet the interpretation of this dream. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_16">16&#160;</span>For as I conceive in mine understanding, woe unto them that shall be left in those days and much more woe unto them that are not left behind! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_17">17&#160;</span>For they that were not left were in heaviness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_18">18&#160;</span>Now understand I the things that are laid up <a href='#FN648' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>in the latter days, which shall happen unto them, and <a href='#FN649' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>to those that are left behind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore are they come into great perils and many necessities, like as these dreams declare. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_20">20&#160;</span>Yet is it easier <a href='#FN650' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>for him that is in danger <a href='#FN651' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>to come into <a href='#FN652' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these things, than to pass away as a cloud out of the world, and not to see the things that happen <a href='#FN653' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>in the last days. And he answered unto me, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_21">21&#160;</span>The interpretation of the vision shall I shew thee, and I will open unto thee the thing that thou hast required. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_22">22&#160;</span>Whereas thou hast spoken of <a href='#FN654' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>them that are left behind, this is the interpretation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_23">23&#160;</span>He that shall endure the peril in that time <a href='#FN655' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>hath kept himself: <a href='#FN656' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>they that be fallen into danger are such as have <a href='#FN657' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>works, and <a href='#FN658' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>faith toward the Almighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_24">24&#160;</span>Know this therefore, that <a href='#FN659' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>they which be left behind are more blessed than <a href='#FN660' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>they that be dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_25">25&#160;</span>This is the meaning of the vision: Whereas thou sawest <a href='#FN661' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>a man coming up from <a href='#FN662' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the midst of the sea: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_26">26&#160;</span>The same is he whom God the Highest hath kept a great season, which <a href='#FN663' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>by his own self shall deliver his creature: and he shall order them <a href='#FN664' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>that are left behind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_27">27&#160;</span>And whereas thou sawest, that <a href='#FN665' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>out of his mouth there came as a blast of wind, and fire, and storm; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_28">28&#160;</span>And that <a href='#FN666' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>he held neither sword, nor any instrument of war, but that <a href='#FN667' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the rushing in of him destroyed the whole multitude <a href='#FN668' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>that came to subdue him; this is the interpretation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_29">29&#160;</span>Behold, the days come, when the most High will begin <a href='#FN669' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>to deliver them that are upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_30">30&#160;</span>And he shall come to <a href='#FN670' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the astonishment of them that dwell on the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_31">31&#160;</span>And one shall undertake to fight against another, one city against another, one place against another, <a href='#FN671' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>one people against another, and <a href='#FN672' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>one realm against another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_32">32&#160;</span>And the time shall be when these things shall come to pass, and the signs shall happen <a href='#FN673' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>which I shewed thee before, and then shall my Son be declared, <a href='#FN674' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>whom thou sawest as a man ascending. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_33">33&#160;</span>And when all the people hear his voice, every man shall in their own land leave the battle they have one against another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_34">34&#160;</span>And an innumerable multitude shall be gathered together, as thou sawest them, willing to come, and to overcome him by fighting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_35">35&#160;</span>But he shall stand upon the top of the <a href='#FN675' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>mount Sion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_36">36&#160;</span>And Sion shall come, and shall be shewed to all men, being prepared and builded, <a href='#FN676' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>like as thou sawest the hill graven without hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_37">37&#160;</span>And this my Son shall rebuke the wicked inventions of those nations, which for their wicked life are fallen into the <a href='#FN677' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>tempest; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_38">38&#160;</span>And shall lay before them their evil thoughts, and the torments wherewith they shall begin to be tormented, <a href='#FN678' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>which are like unto a flame: and he shall destroy them without labour by the law <a href='#FN679' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>which is like unto fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_39">39&#160;</span>And whereas thou sawest that he gathered <a href='#FN680' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>another peaceable multitude unto him; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_40">40&#160;</span>Those are the ten tribes, <a href='#FN681' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>which were carried away prisoners out of their own land in the time of Osea the king, whom <a href='#FN682' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Salmanasar the king of Assyria led away captive, and he carried them over the waters, and so came they into another land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_41">41&#160;</span>But they took this counsel among themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a further country, where never mankind dwelt, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_42">42&#160;</span>That they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_43">43&#160;</span>And they entered into <a href='#FN683' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Euphrates by the narrow places of the river. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_44">44&#160;</span>For the most High then shewed signs for them, and <a href='#FN684' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>held still the flood, till they were passed over. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_45">45&#160;</span>For through that country there was a great way to go, namely, of a year and a half: and the same region is called <a href='#FN685' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Arsareth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_46">46&#160;</span>Then dwelt they there <a href='#FN686' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>until the latter time; and now when they shall begin to come, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_47">47&#160;</span><a href='#FN687' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>The Highest shall <a href='#FN688' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>stay the springs of the stream again, that they may go through: therefore sawest thou the multitude with peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_48">48&#160;</span>But those that be left behind of thy people are they that are found within my borders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_49">49&#160;</span>Now when he destroyeth the multitude of the nations that are gathered together, he shall defend his people that remain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_50">50&#160;</span>And then shall he shew them great wonders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_51">51&#160;</span>Then said I, <a href='#FN689' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>O Lord that bearest rule, shew me this: Wherefore have I <a href='#FN690' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>seen the man coming up from the midst of the sea? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_52">52&#160;</span>And he said unto me, <a href='#FN691' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Like as thou canst neither seek out nor know the things that are in the deep of the sea: even so can no man upon earth see my Son, or those that be with him, but in <a href='#FN692' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the day time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_53">53&#160;</span>This is the interpretation of the dream which thou sawest, and whereby thou only art here lightened. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_54">54&#160;</span>For thou hast forsaken thine own way, and applied thy diligence unto my law, and sought it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_55">55&#160;</span>Thy life hast thou ordered in wisdom, and <a href='#FN693' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>hast called understanding thy mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_56">56&#160;</span>And therefore have I shewed thee the treasures of the Highest: after other three days I will speak other things unto thee, and declare unto thee mighty and wondrous things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_57">57&#160;</span>Then went I forth into the field, giving praise and thanks greatly unto the most High because of his wonders which he did in time; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E213_58">58&#160;</span>And because he governeth the same, and such things as fall in their seasons: and there I sat three days.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E214_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_1">1&#160;</span>And it came to pass <a href='#FN694' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>upon the third day, I sat under an oak, and, behold, there came a voice out of a bush over against me, and said, Esdras, Esdras. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_2">2&#160;</span>And I said, Here am I, Lord And I stood up upon my feet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_3">3&#160;</span>Then said he unto me, <a href='#FN695' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>In the bush I did manifestly reveal myself unto Moses, and talked with him, when my people served in Egypt: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_4">4&#160;</span>And I sent him and led my people out of Egypt, and brought him up to the mount of <a href='#FN696' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>where I held him by me a long season, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_5">5&#160;</span>And told him many wondrous things, and shewed him the secrets of the times, and the end; and commanded him, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_6">6&#160;</span>These words shalt thou declare, and these shalt thou hide. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_7">7&#160;</span>And now I say unto thee, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_8">8&#160;</span>That thou lay up in thy heart the signs that I have shewed, and the dreams that thou hast seen, and the interpretations which thou hast heard: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_9">9&#160;</span>For thou shalt be taken away from all, and from henceforth thou shalt remain with my <a href='#FN697' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Son, and with such as be <a href='#FN698' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>like thee, until the times be ended. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_10">10&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN699' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the world hath lost his youth, and <a href='#FN700' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the times begin to wax old. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_11">11&#160;</span>For the world is divided into twelve parts, and the ten parts of it are gone already, and half of a tenth part: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_12">12&#160;</span>And there remaineth that which is after the half of the tenth part. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_13">13&#160;</span>Now therefore <a href='#FN701' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>set thine house in order, and reprove thy people, comfort such of them as be in trouble, and now renounce corruption, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_14">14&#160;</span>Let go from thee mortal thoughts, <a href='#FN702' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>cast away the burdens of man, put off now the weak nature, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_15">15&#160;</span>And set aside the thoughts that are most heavy unto thee, and haste thee to flee from these times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_16">16&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN703' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>yet greater evils than those which thou hast seen happen shall be done hereafter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_17">17&#160;</span>For look how much the world shall be weaker through age, so much the more shall evils increase upon them that dwell therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_18">18&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN704' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the time is fled far away, and <a href='#FN705' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>leasing is hard at hand: for now hasteth the vision to come, which thou hast seen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_19">19&#160;</span>Then answered I before thee, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_20">20&#160;</span>Behold, Lord, I will go, <a href='#FN706' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>as thou hast commanded me, and reprove the people which are present: but they that shall be born afterward, who shall admonish them? thus the world is set in darkness, and they that dwell therein are without light. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_21">21&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN707' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>thy law is burnt, therefore no man knoweth the things that are done of thee, or the work that shall begin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_22">22&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN708' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>if I have found grace before thee, <a href='#FN709' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>send the Holy Ghost into me, and I shall write all that hath been done in the world since the beginning, which were written in thy law, that men may find thy path, and that they which will live <a href='#FN710' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>in the latter days may live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_23">23&#160;</span>And he answered me, saying, Go thy way, gather the people together, and say unto them, <a href='#FN711' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>that they seek thee not <a href='#FN712' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>for forty days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_24">24&#160;</span>But look thou prepare thee many <a href='#FN713' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>box trees, and take with thee Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, <a href='#FN714' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ecanus, and Asiel, these five which are <a href='#FN715' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>ready to write swiftly; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_25">25&#160;</span>And come hither, and I <a href='#FN716' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>shall light a candle of understanding in thine heart, which shall not be put out, till the things be performed which thou shalt begin to write. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_26">26&#160;</span>And when thou hast done, some things shalt thou publish, and <a href='#FN717' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>some things shalt thou shew secretly to the wise: to morrow this hour shalt thou begin to write. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_27">27&#160;</span>Then went I forth, as he commanded, and gathered all the people together, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN718' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Hear these words, O Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN719' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Our fathers at the beginning were strangers in Egypt, from whence they were delivered: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_30">30&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN720' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>received the law of life, which they kept not, which ye also have transgressed after them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_31">31&#160;</span>Then was the land, even the land of Sion, parted among you by lot: but your fathers, and ye yourselves, have done unrighteousness, and have not kept the ways which the Highest commanded you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_32">32&#160;</span>And forasmuch as he is <a href='#FN721' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>a righteous judge, he took from you in time the thing that he had given you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_33">33&#160;</span>And now are ye <a href='#FN722' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>here, and your brethren among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_34">34&#160;</span>Therefore if so be that ye will subdue your own understanding, and reform your hearts, ye shall be kept alive and after death ye shall obtain mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_35">35&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN723' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>after death shall the judgment come, when we shall live again: and then shall the names of the righteous be manifest, and the works of the ungodly shall be declared. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_36">36&#160;</span><a href='#FN724' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Let no man therefore come unto me now, nor seek after me these forty days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_37">37&#160;</span>So I took <a href='#FN725' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the five men, <a href='#FN726' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>as he commanded me, and we went into the field, and remained there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_38">38&#160;</span>And the next day, behold, a voice called me, saying, Esdras, <a href='#FN727' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>open thy mouth, and drink that I give thee to drink. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_39">39&#160;</span>Then opened I my mouth, and, behold, he reached me a full cup, which was full as it were with water, but the colour of it was like fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_40">40&#160;</span>And I took it, and drank: and when I had drunk of it, my heart uttered understanding, and wisdom grew in my breast, for my spirit strengthened my memory: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_41">41&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN728' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>my mouth was opened, and shut no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_42">42&#160;</span>The Highest gave understanding unto <a href='#FN729' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the five men, and they wrote the wonderful visions of the night that were told, which they knew not: and they sat forty days, and they wrote in the day, and at night they ate bread. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_43">43&#160;</span>As for me. I spake in the day, and I held not my tongue by night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_44">44&#160;</span><a href='#FN730' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>In forty days they wrote <a href='#FN731' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>two hundred and four books. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_45">45&#160;</span>And it came to pass, when <a href='#FN732' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the forty days were filled, that the Highest spake, saying, <a href='#FN733' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>The first that thou hast written publish openly, that the worthy and unworthy may read it: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_46">46&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN734' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>keep the seventy last, that thou mayest deliver them only to such as be wise among the people: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_47">47&#160;</span>For in them is the spring of understanding, <a href='#FN735' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the fountain of wisdom, and <a href='#FN736' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the stream of knowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E214_48">48&#160;</span>And I did so.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E215_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_1">1&#160;</span>Behold, speak thou in the ears of my people the words of prophecy, which <a href='#FN737' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>I will put in thy mouth, saith the Lord: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_2">2&#160;</span>And cause them to be written in <a href='#FN738' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>paper: for <a href='#FN739' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>they are faithful and true. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_3">3&#160;</span>Fear not the imaginations against thee, let not the incredulity of them trouble thee, that speak against thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_4">4&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN740' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>all the unfaithful shall die in their unfaithfulness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, saith the Lord, I will bring plagues upon the world; the sword, famine, death, and destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_6">6&#160;</span>For wickedness hath exceedingly polluted the whole earth, and their hurtful works are fulfilled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore saith the Lord, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_8">8&#160;</span>I will hold my tongue no more as touching their wickedness, which they profanely commit, neither will I suffer them in those things, in which they wickedly exercise themselves: behold, <a href='#FN741' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the innocent and righteous blood crieth unto me, and <a href='#FN742' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the souls of the just complain continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_9">9&#160;</span>And therefore, saith the Lord, I will surely avenge them, and receive unto me all the innocent blood from among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, my people is led <a href='#FN743' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>as a flock to the slaughter: I will not suffer them now <a href='#FN744' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>to dwell in the land of Egypt: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_11">11&#160;</span>But I will bring them <a href='#FN745' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>with a mighty hand and a stretched out arm, and smite Egypt with plagues, as before, and will destroy all the land thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN746' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Egypt shall mourn, and the foundation of it shall be smitten with the plague and punishment that God shall bring upon it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_13">13&#160;</span>They that till the ground shall mourn: for their seeds shall fail through the blasting and hail, and with <a href='#FN747' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>a fearful constellation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN748' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Woe to the world and them that dwell therein! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_15">15&#160;</span>For the sword and their destruction draweth nigh, and <a href='#FN749' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>one people shall stand up and fight against another, and swords in their hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_16">16&#160;</span>For there shall be sedition among men, and invading one another; they shall not regard their kings nor princes, and the course of their actions shall stand in their power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_17">17&#160;</span>A man shall desire to go into a city, and shall not be able. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_18">18&#160;</span>For because of their pride the cities shall be troubled, the houses shall be destroyed, and men shall be afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_19">19&#160;</span>A man shall have no pity upon his neighbour, but shall destroy their houses with the sword, and spoil their goods, <a href='#FN750' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>because of the lack of bread, and for great tribulation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_20">20&#160;</span>Behold, saith God, I will call together all the kings of the earth to reverence me, which are from the rising of the sun, from the south, from the east, and <a href='#FN751' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Libanus; to turn themselves one against another, and repay the things that they have done to them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_21">21&#160;</span>Like as they do yet this day unto <a href='#FN752' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>nn</a>my chosen, so will I do also, and <a href='#FN753' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>recompense in their bosom. Thus saith the Lord God; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_22">22&#160;</span>My right hand shall not spare the sinners, and my sword shall not cease over <a href='#FN754' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>them that shed innocent blood upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_23">23&#160;</span>The fire is gone forth from his wrath, and hath consumed the foundations of the earth, and the sinners, like the straw that is kindled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_24">24&#160;</span>Woe to them that sin, and keep not my commandments! saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_25">25&#160;</span>I will not spare them: go your way, ye children, from the power, defile not my sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_26">26&#160;</span>For the Lord knoweth all them that sin against him, and therefore delivereth he them unto death and destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_27">27&#160;</span>For now are the plagues come upon the whole earth and ye shall remain in them: for God shall not deliver you, because ye have sinned against him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_28">28&#160;</span>Behold an horrible vision, and the appearance thereof from the east: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_29">29&#160;</span>Where the nations of <a href='#FN755' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the dragons of Arabia shall come out with many chariots, and the multitude of them shall be carried as the wind upon earth, that all they which hear them may fear and tremble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_30">30&#160;</span>Also the <a href='#FN756' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Carmanians raging in wrath shall go forth as the wild boars of the wood, and with great power shall they come, and join battle with them, and shall waste a portion of the land of the Assyrians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_31">31&#160;</span>And then shall <a href='#FN757' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the dragons have the upper hand, remembering their nature; and if they shall turn themselves, conspiring together in great power to persecute <a href='#FN758' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_32">32&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN759' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>these shall be troubled bled, and keep silence through their power, and shall flee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_33">33&#160;</span>And from the land of the Assyrians shall the enemy besiege them, and consume some of them, and in their host shall be fear and dread, and strife <a href='#FN760' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>among their kings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_34">34&#160;</span>Behold clouds from the east and from the north unto the south, and they are very horrible to look upon, full of wrath and storm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_35">35&#160;</span>They shall smite one upon another, and <a href='#FN761' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>they shall smite down a great multitude of stars upon the earth, even their own <a href='#FN762' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>star; and <a href='#FN763' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>blood shall be from the sword unto the belly, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_36">36&#160;</span>And dung of men unto the camel’s <a href='#FN764' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hough. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_37">37&#160;</span>And there shall be great fearfulness and trembling upon earth: and they that see the wrath shall be afraid, and trembling shall come upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_38">38&#160;</span>And then shall there come great storms from the south, and from the north, and another part from the west. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_39">39&#160;</span>And strong winds shall arise from the east, and shall open it; and <a href='#FN765' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the cloud which he raised up in wrath, and <a href='#FN766' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the star stirred to cause fear toward the east and west wind, shall be destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_40">40&#160;</span>The great and mighty clouds shall be puffed up <a href='#FN767' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>full of wrath, and <a href='#FN768' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the star, that they may make all the earth afraid, and them that dwell therein; and they shall pour out over every high and eminent place <a href='#FN769' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>an horrible star, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_41">41&#160;</span>Fire, and hail, and flying swords, and many waters, that all fields may be full, and all rivers, with the abundance of great waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_42">42&#160;</span>And they shall break down the cities and walls, mountains and hills, trees of the wood, and grass of the meadows, and their corn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_43">43&#160;</span>And they shall go stedfastly unto Babylon, and <a href='#FN770' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN771' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>make her afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_44">44&#160;</span>They shall come to her, and besiege her, <a href='#FN772' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the star and all wrath shall they pour out upon her: then shall the dust and <a href='#FN773' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>smoke go up unto the heaven, and <a href='#FN774' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>all they that be about her shall bewail her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_45">45&#160;</span>And they that remain under her shall do service unto them that have <a href='#FN775' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>put her in fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_46">46&#160;</span>And thou, <a href='#FN776' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Asia, that art <a href='#FN777' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>partaker of the hope of Babylon, and art the glory of her person: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_47">47&#160;</span>Woe be unto thee, thou wretch, because thou hast made thyself like unto her; and hast decked thy daughters in whoredom, that they might please and glory in thy lovers, which have always desired to commit whoredom with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_48">48&#160;</span>Thou hast followed her that is hated in all her works and inventions: therefore saith God, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_49">49&#160;</span><a href='#FN778' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>I will send plagues upon thee; widowhood, poverty, famine, sword, and pestilence, to waste thy houses with destruction and death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_50">50&#160;</span>And the glory of thy Power <a href='#FN779' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>shall be dried up as a flower, the heat shall arise that is sent over thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_51">51&#160;</span>Thou shalt be weakened as a poor woman with stripes, and as one chastised with wounds, so that the mighty and lovers shall not be able to receive thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_52">52&#160;</span><a href='#FN780' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Would I with jealousy have so proceeded against thee, saith the Lord, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_53">53&#160;</span>If thou hadst not always slain <a href='#FN781' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>my chosen, exalting the stroke of thine hands, and saying over their <a href='#FN782' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dead, <a href='#FN783' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>when thou wast drunken, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN784' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Set forth the beauty of thy countenance? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_55">55&#160;</span>The reward of thy whoredom shall be <a href='#FN785' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>in thy bosom, therefore shalt thou receive recompence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_56">56&#160;</span>Like as thou hast done unto <a href='#FN786' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>my chosen, saith the Lord, even so shall God do unto thee, and shall deliver thee into mischief </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_57">57&#160;</span>Thy children shall die of hunger, and thou shalt fall through the sword: thy cities shall be broken down, and all thine shall perish with the sword in the field. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_58">58&#160;</span>They that be in the mountains shall die of hunger, and <a href='#FN787' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>eat their own flesh, and drink their own blood, for very hunger of bread, and thirst of water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_59">59&#160;</span>Thou as unhappy shalt come through the sea, and receive plagues again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_60">60&#160;</span>And in the passage they shall rush on the <a href='#FN788' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>idle city, and shall destroy some portion of thy land, and <a href='#FN789' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>consume part of thy glory, and shall return to Babylon that was destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_61">61&#160;</span>And thou shalt be cast down by them <a href='#FN790' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>as stubble, and they shall be unto thee as fire; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_62">62&#160;</span>And shall consume thee, and thy cities, thy land, and thy mountains; all thy woods and thy fruitful trees shall they burn up with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E215_63">63&#160;</span>Thy children shall they carry away captive, and, look, <a href='#FN791' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>what thou hast, they shall spoil it, and <a href='#FN792' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN793' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>mar the <a href='#FN794' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>beauty of thy face.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='E216_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN795' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Woe be unto thee, Babylon, and Asia! woe be unto thee, <a href='#FN796' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Egypt and Syria! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN797' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Gird up yourselves with cloths of sack and <a href='#FN798' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>hair, bewail your children, and be sorry; for your destruction is at hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_3">3&#160;</span>A sword is sent upon you, and who may turn it back? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN799' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>A fire is sent among you, and who may quench it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN800' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Plagues are sent unto you, and what is he that may drive them away? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_6">6&#160;</span>May any man drive away an hungry lion in the wood? or may any one quench <a href='#FN801' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the fire in stubble, when it hath begun to burn? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN802' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>May one turn again the arrow that is shot of a strong archer? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN803' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>The mighty Lord sendeth the plagues and who is he that can drive them away? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN804' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>A fire shall go forth from his wrath, and who is he that may quench it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN805' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>He shall cast lightnings, and who shall not fear? <a href='#FN806' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>he shall thunder, and who shall not be afraid? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_11">11&#160;</span>The Lord shall threaten, and who shall not be utterly beaten to powder at his presence? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN807' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>The earth quaketh, and the foundations thereof; the sea ariseth up with waves from the deep, and <a href='#FN808' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the waves of it are troubled, and the fishes thereof also, <a href='#FN809' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>before the Lord, and before the glory of his power: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_13">13&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN810' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>strong is his right hand that bendeth the bow, <a href='#FN811' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>his arrows that he shooteth are <a href='#FN812' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>sharp, and shall not miss, when they begin to be shot into the ends of the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_14">14&#160;</span>Behold, the plagues are sent, and shall not return again, until they come upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN813' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a><a href='#FN814' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>The fire is kindled, and shall not be put out, till it consume the foundation of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN815' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Like as an arrow which is shot of a mighty archer returneth not backward: even so the plagues that shall be sent upon earth shall not return again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_17">17&#160;</span>Woe is me! woe is me! who will deliver me in those days? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN816' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>The beginning of sorrows and great mournings; the beginning of famine and great death; the beginning of wars, and the powers shall stand in fear; the beginning of evils! what shall I do when these evils shall come? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, famine and plague, <a href='#FN817' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>tribulation and anguish, are sent as scourges for amendment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_20">20&#160;</span>But for all these things they shall not turn from their wickedness, nor be always mindful of the scourges. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_21">21&#160;</span>Behold, victuals shall be so good cheap upon earth, that they shall think themselves to be in good case, and even then shall <a href='#FN818' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evils grow upon earth, sword, famine, and great confusion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_22">22&#160;</span>For many of them that dwell upon earth shall perish of famine; and the other, that escape the hunger, shall the sword destroy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_23">23&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN819' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the dead shall be cast out as dung, and there shall be no man to comfort them: for the earth shall be wasted, and the cities shall be cast down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_24">24&#160;</span>There shall be no man left to till the earth, and to sow it </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_25">25&#160;</span>The trees shall give fruit, and who shall gather them? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_26">26&#160;</span>The grapes shall ripen, and who shall <a href='#FN820' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>tread them? for all places shall be desolate of men: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_27">27&#160;</span>So that one man shall desire to see another, and to hear his voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_28">28&#160;</span>For of a city there shall be <a href='#FN821' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>ten left, and two of the field, which shall hide themselves in the thick groves, and <a href='#FN822' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>in the clefts of the rocks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN823' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>As in an orchard of Olives upon every tree there are left three or four olives; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN824' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Or as when a vineyard is gathered, there are left some clusters of them that diligently seek through the vineyard: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_31">31&#160;</span>Even so in those days there shall be <a href='#FN825' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>three or four left by them that search their houses with the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_32">32&#160;</span>And the earth shall be laid waste, and the fields thereof shall wax old, and her ways and all her paths shall grow full of thorns, because no man shall travel therethrough. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN826' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>The virgins shall mourn, having no bridegrooms; the women shall mourn, having no husbands; their daughters shall mourn, having no helpers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_34">34&#160;</span>In the wars shall their bridegrooms be destroyed, and their husbands shall perish of famine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_35">35&#160;</span>Hear now these things and understand them, <a href='#FN827' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>ye servants of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_36">36&#160;</span>Behold, the word of the Lord, receive it: believe not the gods of whom the Lord spake. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_37">37&#160;</span>Behold, the plagues draw nigh, and are not slack. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN828' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>As when a woman with child in the ninth month bringeth forth her son, with two or three hours of her birth great pains compass her womb, which pains, when the child cometh forth, they slack not a moment: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_39">39&#160;</span>Even so shall not the plagues be slack to come upon the earth, and the world shall mourn, and sorrows shall come upon it on every side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_40">40&#160;</span>O my people, hear my word: make you ready to thy battle, and in those evils be even as <a href='#FN829' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>pilgrims upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_41">41&#160;</span><a href='#FN830' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>He that selleth, let him be as he that fleeth away: and he that buyeth, as one that will lose: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_42">42&#160;</span>He that <a href='#FN831' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>occupieth merchandise, as he that hath no profit by it: and he that buildeth, as he that shall not dwell therein: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_43">43&#160;</span>He that soweth, as if he should not reap: so also he that planteth the vineyard, as he that shall not gather the grapes: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_44">44&#160;</span>They that marry, as they that shall get no children; and they that marry not, as the widowers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_45">45&#160;</span>And therefore they that labour labour in vain: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_46">46&#160;</span>For strangers shall reap their fruits, and spoil their goods, overthrow their houses, and take their children captives, for <a href='#FN832' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in captivity and famine shall they get children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_47">47&#160;</span>And they that <a href='#FN833' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>occupy their merchandise with robbery, the more they deck their cities, their houses, their possessions, and their own persons: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_48">48&#160;</span>The more <a href='#FN834' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>will I be angry with them for their sin, saith the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_49">49&#160;</span>Like as a whore <a href='#FN835' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>envieth a <a href='#FN836' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>right honest and virtuous woman: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_50">50&#160;</span>So shall righteousness <a href='#FN837' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>hate iniquity, <a href='#FN838' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>when she decketh herself, and shall accuse her to her face, when he cometh that shall defend him that diligently searcheth out every sin upon earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_51">51&#160;</span>And therefore be ye not like thereunto, nor to the works thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_52">52&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN839' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>yet a little, and iniquity shall be taken away out of the earth, and righteousness shall reign among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_53">53&#160;</span><a href='#FN840' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Let not the sinner say that he hath not sinned: for God <a href='#FN841' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>shall burn coals of fire upon his head, <a href='#FN842' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>which saith before the Lord God and his glory, I have not sinned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_54">54&#160;</span>Behold, the Lord knoweth all the works of men, their <a href='#FN843' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>imaginations, their thoughts, and their <a href='#FN844' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>hearts: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_55">55&#160;</span>Which spake but the word, <a href='#FN845' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Let the earth be made; and it was made: Let the heaven be made; and it was created. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_56">56&#160;</span>In his word were the stars made, and <a href='#FN846' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>he knoweth the number of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_57">57&#160;</span>He searcheth the deep, and the treasures thereof; <a href='#FN847' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>he hath measured the sea, and what it containeth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_58">58&#160;</span><a href='#FN848' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>He hath shut the sea in the midst of the waters, and with his word <a href='#FN849' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>hath he hanged the earth <a href='#FN850' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>upon the waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_59">59&#160;</span><a href='#FN851' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>He spreadeth out the heavens like a vault; <a href='#FN852' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>upon the waters hath he founded it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_60">60&#160;</span><a href='#FN853' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>In the desert hath he made springs of water, and pools upon the tops of the mountains, that the floods might pour down from the high rocks to water the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_61">61&#160;</span><a href='#FN854' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>He made man, and put his heart in the midst of the body, and gave him breath, life, and understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_62">62&#160;</span>Yea and the Spirit of Almighty God, which made all things, and searcheth out all hidden things in the secrets of the earth, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_63">63&#160;</span>Surely he knoweth your <a href='#FN855' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>inventions, and what ye think in your hearts, even them that sin, and would hide their sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_64">64&#160;</span>Therefore hath the Lord exactly searched out all your works, and he will put you all to shame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_65">65&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN856' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>when your sins are brought forth, ye shall be ashamed before men, and your own sins shall be your accusers in that day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_66">66&#160;</span>What will ye do? or how will ye hide your sins before God and <a href='#FN857' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>his angels? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_67">67&#160;</span>Behold, <a href='#FN858' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>God himself is the judge, fear him: leave off from your sins, and forget your iniquities, to meddle no more with them for ever: so shall God lead you forth, and <a href='#FN859' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>deliver you from all trouble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_68">68&#160;</span>For, behold, the burning wrath of a great multitude is kindled over you, and they shall take away certain of you, and feed you, <a href='#FN860' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>being <a href='#FN861' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>idle, with <a href='#FN862' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>things offered unto idols. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_69">69&#160;</span>And they that consent unto them shall be had in derision and in reproach, and trodden under foot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_70">70&#160;</span>For there shall be in every place, and in the next cities, a great insurrection upon those that fear the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_71">71&#160;</span>They shall be like mad men, sparing none, but still spoiling and destroying those that fear the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_72">72&#160;</span>For they shall waste and take away their goods, and cast them out of <a href='#FN863' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>their houses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_73">73&#160;</span>Then shall they be known, who are <a href='#FN864' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>my chosen; and <a href='#FN865' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they shall be tried as the gold in the fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_74">74&#160;</span>Hear, O ye my beloved, saith the Lord: behold, the days of trouble are at hand, but <a href='#FN866' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>I will deliver you from the same. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_75">75&#160;</span>Be ye not afraid neither doubt; for <a href='#FN867' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>God is your guide, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_76">76&#160;</span>And the guide of them who keep my commandments and precepts, saith the Lord God: <a href='#FN868' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>let not your sins weigh you down, and let not your iniquities lift up themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_77">77&#160;</span>Woe be unto them that are bound with their sins, and covered with their iniquities <a href='#FN869' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>like as a field is covered over with bushes, and the path thereof covered with thorns, that no man may travel through! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="E216_78">78&#160;</span>It is <a href='#FN870' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>left undressed, and is cast into the fire to be consumed therewith. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER7_1'>Ezra 7. 1–5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_4'>1 Chr. 6. 4–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Shallum</span>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_12'>1 Chr. 6. 12</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_13'>13</a>. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER7_2'>Ezra 7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_1'>Isai. 58. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_2'>Ex. 20. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_3'>Ezra 9. 3</a>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_2'>Esther 14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_9'>Ex. 32. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_11'>Num. 14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_9"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Latin as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_28'>Exod. 14. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_0'>ch. 8</a>, &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_0'>10</a>, &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_0'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_23'>Numb. 21. 23</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_24'>24</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_33'>33–35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_8'>Josh. 11. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>Ex. 14. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>street</span>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_10'>Isai. 62. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_10'>Ex. 3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_13"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_14'>Ex. 4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>Ex. 13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_32'>Jer. 2. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_28'>28</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_33'>33</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_9'>ch. 2. 9</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_31'>31</a>. See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_13'>Exod. 16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Latin as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_18"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_3'>Numb. 14. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_18"><span class="notemark">v</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_12'>Ex. 14. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_19"><span class="notemark">w</span> 1.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_14'>Ex. 16. 14</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_19"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_20'>Wisd. 16. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_20"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_4'>Wisd. 11. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>abundantly</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_21"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_8'>Ex. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_4'>Isai. 5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>at the bitter waters</span>, or, <span class='add'>waters of Marah</span>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_23'>Ex. 15. 23</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_25'>Ex. 15. 25</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_5'>Ecclus. 38. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS81_11'>Ps. 81. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_8'>Ex. 32. 8</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_10'>10</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_11'>Num. 14. 11</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_8'>Ex. 32. 8</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_10'>10</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_11'>Num. 14. 11</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_25"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R215_2'>2 Chr. 15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_26"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_28'>Prov. 1. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_26"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_7'>Isai. 59. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_28"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as I</span> am <span class='add'>your God</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_37'>Matt. 23. 37</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_34'>Luke 13. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_31"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_13'>Isai. 1. 13</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_32"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_1'>ch. 2. 1</a>. See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_15'>2 Chr. 36. 15</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_33"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_33"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_38'>Matt. 23. 38</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_35'>Luke 13. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_33"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_24'>Isai. 40. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_33"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_24'>Isai. 40. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_33"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS83_13'>Ps. 83. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_34"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_18'>Deut. 28. 18</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_6'>ch. 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_35"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_37'>ver. 37</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_38'>38</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_37"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_37'>ver. 37</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_38'>38</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_37"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_29'>John 20. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_38"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_44'>ch. 2. 44</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_46'>46</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_48'>48</a>. Also <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_10'>Rev. 19. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_9'>22. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_38"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_37'>ver. 37</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_38'>38</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_38"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_11'>Matt. 8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_39"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_11'>Matt. 8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E21_40"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_1'>Mal. 3. 1</a> (Heb. &amp; Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_20'>Deut. 4. 20</a>. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM2_10'>Amos 2. 10</a>. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_4'>Micah 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_32'>ch. 1. 32</a>. See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_15'>2 Chr. 36. 15</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_4'>ver. 4</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_8'>Isai. 47. 8</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_4'>ver. 4</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_8'>Isai. 47. 8</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_4'>Judith 9. 4</a>. See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_77'>1 Esdr. 8. 77</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_34'>ch. 1. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>sacrament</span>, or, <span class='add'>oath</span>. [Lat. not as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_5'>ver. 5</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_15'>ch. 3. 15</a>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_3'>ch. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>Gen. 19. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>Gen. 19. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_15'>ch. 1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_9'>Luke 16. 9</a> (Gk. &amp; Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_52'>ch. 8. 52</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_7'>Rev. 2. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_2'>22. 2</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_14'>14</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_18'>Prov. 3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_27'>Isai. 5. 27</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_22'>Matt. 24. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_13"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_34'>Matt. 25. 34</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_52'>ch. 8. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_37'>Mark 13. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_26'>Deut. 4. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_18'>Isai. 49. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_17'>17</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_30'>30</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_25'>ver. 25</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>bring them up with gladness, as a dove, make their feet fast: for, &amp;c</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_28'>John 5. 28</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_29'>29</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_28'>John 5. 28</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_29'>29</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>thy name, O Israel</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_17'>17</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_30'>30</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_25'>ver. 25</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_18"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_2'>Rev. 22. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_19"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_8'>Ex. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_1'>Cant. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_1'>Cant. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_17'>Isai. 1. 17</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_22'>Ex. 22. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_20"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_36'>Matt. 25. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_21"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_14'>Lev. 19. 14</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_18'>Deut. 27. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_17'>Tobit 1. 17</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">[Lat.] <span class='add'>signing bury</span> them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_23"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_28'>Matt. 19. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_25"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_26"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN17_12'>John 17. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_28"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_17'>Isai. 54. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_29"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_16'>Isai. 51. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_29"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_22'>Matt. 5. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_30"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_31"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_14'>1 Thess. 4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_31"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_15'>ch. 1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>preach</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_33"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_1'>Ex. 3. 1</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_10'>Deut. 4. 10</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_15'>15</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_7'>Ecclus. 48. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_34"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_11'>John 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_34"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_29'>Matt. 11. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_34"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB1_2'>Heb. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_35"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_19'>Isai. 60. 19</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_20'>20</a>. See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_23'>Rev. 21. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_36"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_36'>ver. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_36"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_19'>Isai. 60. 19</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_20'>20</a>. See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_23'>Rev. 21. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_36"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_47'>Luke 1. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_37"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TH.xhtml#H12_12'>1 Thess. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_38"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_4'>Rev. 7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_38"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_5'>ch. 6. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_53'>8. 53</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_20'>ch. 6. 20</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>for</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_38"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_9'>Rev. 19. 9</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_2'>Matt. 22. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_39"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_36'>ver. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_39"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_4'>Rev. 3. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. <span class='add'>conclude</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_40"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_4'>Rev. 3. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_41"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.41</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_36'>ch. 4. 36</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_11'>Rev. 6. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_43'>ch. 5. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_41"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_8'>ch. 9. 8</a>. Comp. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP1_4'>Eph. 1. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_42"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_1'>Rev. 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_42"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_9'>Rev. 7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_43"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_43'>ver. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_43"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_10'>Rev. 2. 10</a>. So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV4_4'>Rev. 4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_44"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_38'>ch. 1. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Lord</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_3'>ch. 4. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_5'>5</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_22'>22</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_41'>41</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_33'>5. 33</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_34'>34</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_35'>35</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_41'>9. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_44"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_14'>Rev. 7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_45"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_4'>2 Cor. 5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_45"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_10'>Rev. 2. 10</a>. So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV4_4'>Rev. 4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_45"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_9'>Rev. 7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_46"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.46</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_38'>ch. 1. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_46"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_43'>ver. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_47"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_10'>Rev. 2. 10</a>. So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV4_4'>Rev. 4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_48"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.48</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_38'>ch. 1. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E22_48"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV10_11'>Rev. 10. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_10'>22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_8'>2 Kin. 25. 8</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK24_38'>Luke 24. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_4"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_24'>Isai. 44. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>Gen. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>Gen. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_8'>Gen. 2. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_12'>Gen. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_11'>Gen. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_10'>Gen. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_1'>Gen. 8. 1</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_20'>1 Pet. 3. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_1'>Gen. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_5'>Gen. 17. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_7'>2 Chr. 20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_7'>Gen. 17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_2'>Gen. 21. 2</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_25'>Gen. 25. 25</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_2'>Mal. 1. 2</a>, <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_3'>3</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_13'>Rom. 9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_16"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_10'>Gen. 32. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_1'>Exod. 19. 1</a>. So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_10'>Deut. 4. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_18"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_10'>2 Sam. 22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_18"><span class="notemark">w</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS93_1'>Ps. 93. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS96_10'>96. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS77_16'>Ps. 77. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_18"><span class="notemark">y</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_18'>Ex. 20. 18–21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_19"><span class="notemark">z</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_16'>Ex. 19. 16</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>and to all the generation of Israel, that they should keep it with diligence</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_48'>ch. 7. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_8'>Rom. 7. 8–13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_22"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_53'>ch. 8. 53</a>. Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_18'>Deut. 29. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_8'>Rom. 7. 8–13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_23"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_13'>1 Sam. 16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_2'>2 Sam. 5. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_5'>7. 5</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_28"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_29"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_26'>Ps. 73. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_3'>ch. 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>conceive</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_31"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E23_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>abound</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_36'>ver. 36</a> (text). <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ch. 5. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_2"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_34'>ch. 5. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_34'>Prov. 23. 34</a> marg. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_25'>ch. 13. 25</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_51'>51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_2'>ch. 6. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_52'>8. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_21'>ver. 21</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_16'>Wisd. 9. 16</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_12'>John 3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_4'>1 Thess. 4. 4</a>. So <a href='2CO.xhtml#C24_7'>2 Cor. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>incorruption</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_13"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_8'>Judg. 9. 8</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R225_18'>2 Chr. 25. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_16"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_15'>Judg. 9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_17"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_8'>Job 38. 8</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_10'>10</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>the land</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>waves</span>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_15'>ver. 15</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_17'>17</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>the land</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_21"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_21'>ver. 21</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_16'>Wisd. 9. 16</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_12'>John 3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_21"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_8'>Isai. 55. 8</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_9'>9</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_31'>John 3. 31</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_14'>1 Cor. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_23"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_31'>ch. 3. 31–36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>no where</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_24"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_19'>Job 4. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_25"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_31'>ch. 3. 31–36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_26"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_17'>1 John 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_27"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN5_19'>1 John 5. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_30"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_48'>ch. 7. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_30"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_30"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>floor</span>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_32'>ver. 32</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_35'>35</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_39'>39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_30"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_33'>Jer. 51. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_31"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_33"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_9'>Gen. 47. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_34"><span class="notemark">s</span> 4.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_35"><span class="notemark">t</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_9'>Rev. 6. 9</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_35"><span class="notemark">u</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_41'>ver. 41</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_37'>37</a> (Lat.). &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_32'>7. 32</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_35"><span class="notemark">t</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_9'>Rev. 6. 9</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.36</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>Jeremiel</span>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_36"><span class="notemark">v</span> 4.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_16'>1 Thess. 4. 16</a>. <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_9'>Jude 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_36"><span class="notemark">w</span> 4.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_41'>ch. 2. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_38"><span class="notemark">ww</span> 4.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_41"><span class="notemark">u</span> 4.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_41'>ver. 41</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_37'>37</a> (Lat.). &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_32'>7. 32</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_44"><span class="notemark">x</span> 4.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN33_10'>Gen. 33. 10</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_56'>ch. 5. 56</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_11'>6. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_7'>12. 7</a> (Lat.). So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_42'>ch. 8. 42</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_22'>14. 22</a> in the Lat. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN33_15'>Gen. 33. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_45"><span class="notemark">y</span> 4.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_50"><span class="notemark">y</span> 4.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>measure</span>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_51"><span class="notemark">z</span> 4.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_51'>ver. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>who shall be?</span> Manuscript.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_51"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_51'>ver. 51</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_13'>13</a>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ch. 8. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_52"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_51'>ver. 51</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_13'>13</a>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ch. 8. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E24_52"><span class="notemark">z</span> 4.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_51'>ver. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_52'>ch. 4. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>shall be found with great wealth</span>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_63'>ch. 15. 63</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_8'>Luke 18. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_12'>Matt. 24. 12</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_10'>ver. 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_1'>Isai. 13. 1</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_6'>6</a>, &amp;c. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_30'>ch. 3. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>that thou treadest upon and seest</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV8_10'>Rev. 8. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC14_7'>Zech. 14. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_34'>John 19. 34</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_7'>Wisd. 14. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_40'>Luke 19. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>slaked</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_3'>Prov. 22. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_35'>ch. 4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_10"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_12'>Matt. 24. 12</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_10'>ver. 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>be directed</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_52'>ch. 4. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_31'>ch. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_31'>ch. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_15"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_30'>ch. 10. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_5'>1 Esdr. 5. 5</a>, <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_48'>48</a>, <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_56'>56</a>. &amp; <a href='1ES.xhtml#E16_2'>6. 2</a>. See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_17'>1 Chr. 3. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER7_6'>Ezra 7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_12'>John 10. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_20"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_31'>ch. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_20"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_31'>ch. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_20"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_35'>ch. 6. 35</a>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_4'>ch. 3. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_38'>4. 38</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_38'>ver. 38</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_11'>ch. 6. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_17'>7. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_7'>12. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_51'>13. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_28'>ver. 28</a> (Lat.). See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS80_8'>Ps. 80. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_24"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_1'>Isai. 51. 1</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_1'>Cant. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_25"><span class="notemark">w</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS46_4'>Ps. 46. 4</a>? <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_6'>Isai. 8. 6</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_26"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_8'>Gen. 8. 8–11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_26"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_5'>Ex. 12. 5</a>? See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_29'>John 1. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_27"><span class="notemark">z</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_8'>Deut. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>over</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_28"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS80_9'>Ps. 80. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_28"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_28'>ver. 28</a> (Lat.). See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS80_8'>Ps. 80. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_31"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_1'>4. 1</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_12'>ch. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_33"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_47'>ch. 8. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_34"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_7'>Ps. 16. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_21'>73. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_34"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_2'>ch. 4. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_35"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_11'>Job 3. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_37"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.37</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_35'>ch. 4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_38"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_38"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.38</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_11'>Dan. 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_40"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP3_19'>Eph. 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_42"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_15'>1 Thess. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_43"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.43</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_41'>ch. 2. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_45"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_50"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_50'>ver. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_52"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_4'>Gen. 6. 4</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_33'>Num. 13. 33</a>. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_4'>1 Sam. 17. 4</a>. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S221_16'>2 Sam. 21. 16–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_56"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.56</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_44'>ch. 4. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E25_56"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_18'>ch. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>circle of the earth</span>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_40'>ch. 11. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_3"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_44'>ver. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_22'>Heb. 12. 22</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_3'>ch. 13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_6'>Gen. 1. 6</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_38'>ch. 2. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_5'>Rom. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_5'>Rom. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_22'>Prov. 8. 22–30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_26'>Gen. 25. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>from the beginning</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_4'>ch. 3. 4</a> (Lat.). &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_30'>4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_44'>ch. 4. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>ch. 5. 1–13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_31'>ch. 5. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>earthquake</span>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_18'>ch. 3. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_3'>9. 3</a> in the Lat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_15'>Rev. 1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_56'>ch. 5. 56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sealed</span>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_38'>ch. 2. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_10'>Dan. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_23"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_52'>1 Cor. 15. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_24"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_24"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_21'>Matt. 10. 21</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_25"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_21'>Matt. 10. 21</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_25"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_8'>ch. 9. 8</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_30'>Luke 2. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_26"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_15'>1 Thess. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_26"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_15'>1 Thess. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_31"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_13'>ch. 5. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_31"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_13'>ch. 5. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_31"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_13'>ch. 5. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_31"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_52'>ch. 13. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_33"><span class="notemark">y</span> 6.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_9'>Josh. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_34"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1SA.xhtml#S112_21'>1 Sam. 12. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_35"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ch. 5. 20</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_21'>21</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_23'>ch. 9. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_32'>10. 32</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_39'>12. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_36"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ch. 5. 20</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_21'>21</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_23'>ch. 9. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_32'>10. 32</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_39'>12. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_38"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_1'>Gen. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_39"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_2'>Gen. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_39"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 6.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_30'>ch. 7. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_40"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_3'>Gen. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_40"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_7'>Ps. 135. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_41"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_6'>Gen. 1. 6</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_42"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_9'>Gen. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_44"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_11'>Gen. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_44"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_45"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_14'>Gen. 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_46"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_15'>Gen. 1. 15</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_19'>Deut. 4. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_47"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_20'>Gen. 1. 20</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_47"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_42'>ver. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_48"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.48</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_20'>Gen. 1. 20</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_49"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.49</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>Behemoth</span>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB40_15'>Job 40. 15</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_49"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.49</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB41_1'>Job 41. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_50"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_42'>ver. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_51"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_49'>ver. 49</a> marg.?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_51"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_42'>ver. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_51"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_10'>Ps. 50. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_52"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_42'>ver. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_52"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_14'>Ps. 74. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_53"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_24'>Gen. 1. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_54"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_26'>Gen. 1. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_55"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_59'>ver. 59</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_11'>ch. 7. 11</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_44'>ch. 8. 44</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_58"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_18'>Ecclus. 17. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_12'>36. 12</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_22'>Ex. 4. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_59"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_59'>ver. 59</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_11'>ch. 7. 11</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_44'>ch. 8. 44</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E26_59"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_10'>Ps. 74. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_31'>5. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_33'>ch. 5. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>steep place</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_11"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_55'>ch. 6. 55</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_11"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_12"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_7'>Job 5. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>greater</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_13"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_13"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_9'>Gen. 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_14"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_14'>Matt. 7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_17"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_17"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_1'>Deut. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_24"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_31'>Num. 15. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_25"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_6'>2 Cor. 9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_27"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_20'>ver. 20–25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_28"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_26'>Dan. 9. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_29"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_26'>Dan. 9. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_30"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_39'>ch. 6. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>first beginning</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_32"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS26_19'>Isai. 26. 19</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_32"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS26_19'>Isai. 26. 19</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_32"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_35'>ch. 4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_33"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_31'>Matt. 25. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_34"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_44'>ver. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_34"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_44'>ver. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_35"><span class="notemark">v</span> 7.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_13'>Rev. 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_35"><span class="notemark">w</span> 7.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_27'>Matt. 16. 27</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>Ps. 62. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_36"><span class="notemark">x</span> 7.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_23'>Gen. 18. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_36"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_11'>Exod. 32. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_37"><span class="notemark">z</span> 7.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_6'>Josh. 7. 6</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Achor</span>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_1'>Josh. 7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_38"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_9'>1 Sam. 7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_38"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S224_17'>2 Sam. 24. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_38"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_23'>1 Kings 8. 23</a>. &amp;c. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_14'>2 Chr. 6. 14</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_39"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_42'>1 Kings 18. 42</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_45'>45</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_18'>James 5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_39"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_21'>1 Kings 17. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_40"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_15'>2 Kings 19. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_43"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_54'>1 Cor. 15. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_43"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_54'>1 Cor. 15. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_44"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_44"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_45"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_7'>Ps. 49. 7</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_45"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.45</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_58'>ver. 58</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_37'>Rom. 8. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_47"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_22'>Eccles. 2. 22</a>, <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_48"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.48</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_21'>ch. 3. 21</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_26'>26</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_30'>4. 30</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_11'>ver. 11</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM5_18'>Rom. 5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_49"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM6_23'>Rom. 6. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_52"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a chaste life</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_53"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_7'>Rev. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fulness</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_53"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_2'>Rev. 22. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_55"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.55</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_43'>Matt. 13. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_55"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.55</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_8'>Lam. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>intent</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_58"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_55'>ver. 55</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_56'>56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_58"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.58</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_58'>ver. 58</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_37'>Rom. 8. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_58"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_43'>ver. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_59"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_19'>Deut. 30. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_61"><span class="notemark">w</span> 7.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK15_7'>Luke 15. 7</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK15_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_64"><span class="notemark">x</span> 7.64</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_4'>Rom. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_67"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.67</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_68'>ver. 68</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_68"><span class="notemark">z</span> 7.68</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS130_3'>Ps. 130. 3</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS143_2'>Ps. 143. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_68"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.68</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_68'>ver. 68</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_69"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.69</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>created</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E27_69"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.69</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>contempts</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_55'>55</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_15'>ch. 9. 15</a>. So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_14'>Matt. 7. 14</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_23'>Luke 13. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_70'>ch. 7. 70</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_22'>9. 22</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_41'>ver. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_16'>Matt. 20. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_32'>1 Cor. 15. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to give us</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_9'>Isai. 45. 9</a>. So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS64_8'>Isai. 64. 8</a>. Or <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_2'>ver. 2</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>how is the body fashioned</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_13'>Ps. 139. 13–16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_13"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_27'>Heb. 9. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_14"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_8'>Job 10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_18"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_9'>James 5. 9</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_61'>ver. 61</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_12'>Rev. 22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_19"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_36'>ch. 14. 36–48</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_21"><span class="notemark">j</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_2'>Isai. 6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_22"><span class="notemark">k</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_4'>Ps. 104. 4</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB1_7'>Heb. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_23"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_16'>2 Sam. 22. 16</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_15'>Ps. 18. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_23"><span class="notemark">m</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_32'>Ps. 104. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_28"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>Prov. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>are sick</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_31"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_36'>ver. 36</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_11'>Ps. 25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.32</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>be willing</span>. Lat. not as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_32"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='TIT.xhtml#TT3_5'>Tit. 3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_33"><span class="notemark">q</span> 8.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_7'>ch. 9. 7</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_6'>Rom. 2. 6</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_35"><span class="notemark">r</span> 8.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_36'>2 Chr. 6. 36</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_46'>1 Kings 8. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_36"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.36</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_36'>ver. 36</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_11'>Ps. 25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>substance</span>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_1'>Heb. 11. 1</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_38"><span class="notemark">s</span> 8.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_5'>Gen. 6. 5</a> marg. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_39'>ver. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_38"><span class="notemark">t</span> 8.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_12'>ch. 9. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_38"><span class="notemark">u</span> 8.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_39"><span class="notemark">x</span> 8.39</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_4'>Gen. 4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_39"><span class="notemark">s</span> 8.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_5'>Gen. 6. 5</a> marg. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_39'>ver. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_39"><span class="notemark">y</span> 8.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_9'>Gen. 47. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_41"><span class="notemark">z</span> 8.41</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_42"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.42</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_44'>ch. 4. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_43"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.43</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_17'>Acts 14. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_44"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_26'>Gen. 1. 26</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_44"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.44</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_55'>ch. 6. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_44"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_41'>ver. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_45"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_17'>Joel 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_47"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_33'>ch. 5. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_50"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ver. 63</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_23'>ch. 12. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_22'>14. 22</a> in the Lat. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_59'>ch. 10. 59</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_9'>12. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_18'>13. 18</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_20'>20</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_46'>46</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_1'>2 Tim. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_50"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_2'>2 Tim. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_52"><span class="notemark">j</span> 8.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_6'>ch. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_52"><span class="notemark">k</span> 8.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_2'>Rev. 22. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_52"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_13'>ch. 2. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_52"><span class="notemark">m</span> 8.52</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_2'>Rev. 21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_52"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_13'>Rev. 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_53"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_38'>ch. 2. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_53"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS39_11'>Ps. 39. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, [<span class='add'>the</span>] <span class='add'>grave</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_54"><span class="notemark">q</span> 8.54</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_17'>Rev. 7. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_56"><span class="notemark">r</span> 8.56</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_11'>ch. 9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_58"><span class="notemark">s</span> 8.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS14_1'>Ps. 14. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS53_1'>53. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_59"><span class="notemark">t</span> 8.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_52'>ver. 52–54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_59"><span class="notemark">u</span> 8.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_23'>Luke 16. 23</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_59"><span class="notemark">v</span> 8.59</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_32'>Ezek. 18. 32</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_13'>Wisd. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_60"><span class="notemark">w</span> 8.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_39'>Ezek. 20. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK39_7'>39. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_60"><span class="notemark">x</span> 8.60</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_2'>2 Tim. 3. 2</a>. So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_21'>Rom. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_61"><span class="notemark">y</span> 8.61</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_62"><span class="notemark">yy</span> 8.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_9'>ch. 14. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_63"><span class="notemark">z</span> 8.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_52'>ch. 4. 52</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>5. 1</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_13'>13</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_1'>9. 1</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_6'>6</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_32'>13. 32</a> in the Lat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E28_63"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ver. 63</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_23'>ch. 12. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_22'>14. 22</a> in the Lat. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_59'>ch. 10. 59</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_9'>12. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_18'>13. 18</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_20'>20</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_46'>46</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_1'>2 Tim. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ch. 8. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_7'>Matt. 24. 7</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_14'>ch. 6. 14</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_6'>Matt. 24. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_6"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ch. 8. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_33'>ch. 8. 33</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_23'>13. 23</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_27'>Matt. 16. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_23'>ch. 13. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_28'>Rom. 3. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_25'>ch. 6. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_41'>ch. 2. 41</a>. Comp. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP1_4'>Ephes. 1. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>they shall marvel</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_25'>Luke 16. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_56'>ch. 8. 56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_17'>Heb. 12. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_38'>ch. 8. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_18'>1 Pet. 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_55'>ch. 6. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>And now, because the time of the world was come, when I was preparing the world, &amp;c</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>but when the world was made, both now and then the manners of every one created were corrupted by</span> <span class="notemark">p</span> <span class='add'>a never failing harvest, and</span> <span class="notemark">q</span> <span class='add'>a law</span> <span class="notemark">r</span> <span class='add'>unsearchable</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_17'>Mal. 3. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_4'>2 Kings 19. 4</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_9'>Isai. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>grain</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_4'>2 Kings 19. 4</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_9'>Isai. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_22"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>grain</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_23"><span class="notemark">u</span> 9.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_35'>ch. 6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_24"><span class="notemark">w</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_51'>ch. 12. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_17'>ch. 12. 17</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_12'>Deut. 4. 12</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_27"><span class="notemark">y</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_37'>ch. 6. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_41'>ch. 14. 41</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_2'>Matt. 5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_9'>Exod. 19. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_10'>24. 10</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_12'>Deut. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>cometh</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_32"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_36"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_19'>ver. 19</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_33'>33</a>. Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_10'>Rom. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_37"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.37</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_38"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_41'>ch. 10. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_38"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.38</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_13'>Gen. 44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_38"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_11'>Judith 4. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_1'>9. 1</a>. So <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_1'>Esth. 4. 1</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_6'>Josh. 7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_39"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.39</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_5'>ch. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_41"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_44'>ch. 2. 44</a> and marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_41"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_10'>1 Sam. 1. 10</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_44"><span class="notemark">j</span> 9.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_11'>1 Sam. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E29_47"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB8_19'>Tobit 8. 19</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_2'>Matt. 22. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_11'>Job 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>countrymen</span>. [Lat.] <span class='add'>citizens</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_45'>ch. 9. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_5"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_39'>ch. 9. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>speeches</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_15'>Luke 22. 15</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>abolished</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>But the earth after the manner of the earth, whereinto the present multitude is gone</span> again, <span class='add'>as it came out</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_16"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_17'>Ps. 145. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_21"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_7'>Lam. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_21"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_7'>Lam. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_21"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_19'>2 Chr. 36. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_22"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_21'>1 Macc. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_22"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_21'>ch. 14. 21</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_5'>2 Macc. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_22"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK7_21'>Ezek. 7. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_22"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM5_11'>Lam. 5. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_22"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM5_11'>Lam. 5. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_23"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_12'>Cant. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_23"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS44_10'>Ps. 44. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_41'>106. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_71'>Luke 1. 71</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_27"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_42'>ver. 42</a>. Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_10'>Rev. 21. 10</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_28"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>into the multitude in</span> <span class="notemark">r</span> <span class='add'>a trance</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_30"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_30"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_15'>ch. 5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_32"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_20'>ch. 5. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_35'>6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_32"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_24'>ch. 9. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>trance</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_28'>ver. 28</a> (Lat. not as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_40'>ver. 40</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_59'>59</a>). <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_3'>ch. 12. 3</a> (comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_30'>ch. 13. 30</a> Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>purpose</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_41"><span class="notemark">v</span> 10.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_49'>ver. 49</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_38'>ch. 9. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_42"><span class="notemark">w</span> 10.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>interpretation</span> (Lat. not as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_8'>ch. 12. 8</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_10'>10</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_17'>17</a>, &amp;c.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_45"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_43'>ch. 9. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_46"><span class="notemark">y</span> 10.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_62'>1 Kings 8. 62–64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_48"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.48</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_49"><span class="notemark">v</span> 10.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_49'>ver. 49</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_38'>ch. 9. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_51"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_24'>ch. 9. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_52"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_53"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_24'>ch. 9. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_54"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_55"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.55</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS48_12'>Ps. 48. 12</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS48_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>art called to be with, &amp;c</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_59"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>last</span> things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E210_59"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_3'>Dan. 7. 3</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV13_1'>Rev. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_1"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_49'>Deut. 28. 49</a>. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK17_3'>Ezek. 17. 3</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK17_7'>7</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_4'>Dan. 7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. <span class='add'>she</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_11"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_12"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_13"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_16'>Ps. 103. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_20"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_22"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_22"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_23"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_4'>ver. 4</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_23"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_23"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>ver. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_22'>ver. 22</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_24"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_26'>26</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_27'>27</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_24"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_25"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_26"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_26'>26</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_27'>27</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_27"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_26'>26</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_27'>27</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_28"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_26'>26</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_27'>27</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_4'>ver. 4</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_31"><span class="notemark">j</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_31"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ver. 24</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_26'>26</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_27'>27</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_31"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_32"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_24'>ch. 12. 24</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_33"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_37"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_31'>ch. 12. 31</a>. See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV5_5'>Rev. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_39"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_3'>Dan. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_40"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_7'>Dan. 7. 7</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_19'>19</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_23'>23</a>. Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_40'>Dan. 2. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_40"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.40</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_1'>ch. 6. 1</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_40"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_24'>ch. 12. 24</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_45"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_45"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_45"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_45"><span class="notemark">s</span> 11.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_7'>ver. 7</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E211_46"><span class="notemark">t</span> 11.46</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_12'>Isai. 28. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_35'>ch. 11. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_25'>ch. 11. 25–28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ch. 11. 24</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_21'>ver. 21</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_29'>29</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ch. 11. 24</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_21'>ver. 21</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_29'>29</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_3"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_30'>ch. 13. 30</a>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_37'>ch. 10. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_44'>ch. 4. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_59'>ch. 10. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_14'>ch. 13. 14</a> (Lat).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_1'>ch 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_7'>Dan. 7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_12'>ch. 11. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_17'>ch. 11. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_24'>ch. 9. 24</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_12'>Deut. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 12.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_10'>ch. 11. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_3'>ch. 11. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_22'>ch. 11. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_21"><span class="notemark">q</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_25'>ch. 11. 25–28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ch. 11. 24</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_29'>29</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_22"><span class="notemark">s</span> 12.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_1'>ch. 11. 1</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_23"><span class="notemark">t</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_32'>ch. 11. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_26"><span class="notemark">w</span> 12.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_33'>ch. 11. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_28"><span class="notemark">x</span> 12.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_35'>ch. 11. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 12.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_29"><span class="notemark">r</span> 12.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ch. 11. 24</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_29'>29</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_30"><span class="notemark">r</span> 12.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_24'>ch. 11. 24</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_29'>29</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_30"><span class="notemark">z</span> 12.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN625"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_31"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E211_37'>ch. 11. 37–46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN626"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.32</a>
 <span class="ft">[Lat. <span class='add'>wind</span>, or, <span class='add'>spirit</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN627"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_34"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_38'>ch. 8. 38</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN628"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_37"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_19'>Rev. 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN629"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_37"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 12.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_26'>ch. 14. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN630"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_39"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_23'>ch. 9. 23</a>. See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_35'>ch. 6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN631"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_40"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN632"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>people</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN633"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_42"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_13'>Isai. 24. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN634"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_42"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2PE.xhtml#P21_19'>2 Pet. 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN635"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_42"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_30'>Ps. 107. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN636"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_44"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_12'>Ex. 14. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN637"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_44"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN638"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_45"><span class="notemark">k</span> 12.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_4'>1 Kin. 19. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN639"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_51"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_39'>ver. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN640"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E212_51"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_24'>ch. 9. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN641"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_51'>ch. 12. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN642"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class='add'>a certain man as the wind</span>, Junius. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_5'>5</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_25'>25</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_32'>32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN643"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class='add'>clouds</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN644"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_3'>ch. 6. 3</a>. <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_14'>Jude 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN645"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_13"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN646"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Junius, <span class='add'>of the</span> things <span class='add'>that were offered</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN647"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_14"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_9'>ch. 12. 9</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN648"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_18"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN649"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN650"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_20"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN651"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_20"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN652"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>this day</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN653"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_20"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN654"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_22"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN655"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_23"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN5_18'>1 John 5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN656"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_23"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN657"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_23"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_7'>ch. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN658"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_23"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_7'>ch. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN659"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN660"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN661"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_25"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_2'>ver. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN662"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_25"><span class="notemark">j</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_51'>ver. 51</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_34'>Prov. 23. 34</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN663"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_26"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_24'>1 Pet. 2. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN664"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_26"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN665"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_27"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN666"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_28"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN667"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_28"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN668"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_28"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_5'>ver. 5</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN669"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_29"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_28'>Luke 21. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN670"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_30"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_3'>ch. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN671"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_31"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_7'>Matt. 24. 7</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_8'>Mark 13. 8</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_10'>Luke 21. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN672"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_31"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_7'>Matt. 24. 7</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_8'>Mark 13. 8</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_10'>Luke 21. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN673"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_32"><span class="notemark">s</span> 13.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>ch. 5. 1–12</a>? See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_63'>ch. 8. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN674"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_32"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_2'>ver. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN675"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_35"><span class="notemark">t</span> 13.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN676"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_36"><span class="notemark">t</span> 13.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN677"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_37"><span class="notemark">u</span> 13.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN678"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_38"><span class="notemark">u</span> 13.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN679"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_38"><span class="notemark">u</span> 13.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN680"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_39"><span class="notemark">x</span> 13.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN681"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_40"><span class="notemark">y</span> 13.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN682"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_40"><span class="notemark">z</span> 13.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K217_3'>2 Kings 17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN683"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_43"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_14'>Rev. 9. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV16_12'>16. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN684"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_44"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_47'>ver. 47</a> (Lat.). <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>Ex. 14. 21</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_15'>Josh. 3. 15</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN685"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Ararath</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN686"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_46"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.46</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN687"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_47"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_15'>Isai. 11. 15</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN688"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_47"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.47</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_47'>ver. 47</a> (Lat.). <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>Ex. 14. 21</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_15'>Josh. 3. 15</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN689"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_51"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN690"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_51"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN691"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_52"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS36_6'>Ps. 36. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN692"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_52"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_31'>ch. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN693"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E213_55"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.55</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_2'>Ecclus. 15. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_4'>Prov. 7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN694"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_56'>ch. 13. 56</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_58'>58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN695"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_2'>Ex. 3. 2–8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN696"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_18'>Ex. 24. 18</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN697"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>counsel</span>]. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_14'>Prov. 8. 14</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_30'>30</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_6'>Isai. 9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN698"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_62'>ch. 8. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN699"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_10"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_26'>Ps. 102. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN700"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_10"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_26'>Ps. 102. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN701"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_13"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S217_23'>2 Sam. 17. 23</a> (Lat.). So <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_1'>2 Kin. 20. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN702"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_14"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_1'>Heb. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN703"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_16"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_8'>Matt. 24. 8</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_8'>Mark 13. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN704"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_18"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN705"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_18"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS4_2'>Ps. 4. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS5_6'>5. 6</a> only (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN706"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_20"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN707"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_21"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_22'>ch. 10. 22</a> with <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_20'>Ex. 40. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN708"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_22"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_44'>ch. 4. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN709"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_22"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P21_21'>2 Pet. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN710"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_50'>ch. 8. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN711"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_23"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_36'>ver. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN712"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN713"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>box tables to write on :</span> Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_44'>ver. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN714"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Banus</span>. So <a href='1ES.xhtml#E19_34'>1 Esdr. 9. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN715"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_24"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER7_6'>Ezra 7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN716"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_25"><span class="notemark">t</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_105'>Ps. 119. 105</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_23'>Prov. 6. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN717"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_26"><span class="notemark">u</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_37'>ch. 12. 37</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_38'>38</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_45'>ver. 45</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_46'>46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN718"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_28"><span class="notemark">w</span> 14.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_1'>Deut. 5. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_4'>6. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_1'>9. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT20_3'>20. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN719"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_29"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_4'>Gen. 47. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN720"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_30"><span class="notemark">y</span> 14.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_53'>Acts 7. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN721"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_32"><span class="notemark">z</span> 14.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_11'>Ps. 7. 11</a> marg. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_6'>2 Macc. 12. 6</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_41'>41</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_8'>2 Tim. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN722"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_33"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E23_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN723"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_35"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_27'>Heb. 9. 27</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>Dan. 12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN724"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_36"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_23'>ver. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_45'>45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN725"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_37"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_1'>Ex. 24. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN726"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_37"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN727"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_38"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK3_1'>Ezek. 3. 1</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK3_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN728"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_41"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E29_28'>ch. 9. 28</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_2'>Matt. 5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN729"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_42"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.42</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN730"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_44"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_23'>ver. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_45'>45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN731"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>nine hundred and four</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN732"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_45"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_23'>ver. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_45'>45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN733"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_45"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN734"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_46"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.46</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN735"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_47"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.47</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_5'>Ecclus. 1. 5</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_12'>Baruch 3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN736"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E214_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the light of knowledge</span>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_10'>Wisd. 7. 10</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_26'>26</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN737"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_5'>Num. 23. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN738"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2JN.xhtml#2JN1_12'>2 John 12</a>. So <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB7_14'>Tobit 7. 14</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN739"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_6'>Rev. 22. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN740"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_36'>John 3. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN741"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_10'>Rev. 6. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_2'>19. 2</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN742"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_10'>Rev. 6. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_2'>19. 2</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN743"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS44_22'>Ps. 44. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN744"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_26'>2 Kin. 25. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN745"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_16'>Wisd. 16. 16</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_34'>Deut. 4. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN746"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS19_1'>Isai. 19. 1</a>, &amp;c. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_2'>Ezek. 32. 2</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN747"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_40'>ver. 40</a> (Lat.). Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_35'>ver. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN748"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV8_13'>Rev. 8. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV12_12'>12. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN749"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS19_2'>Isai. 19. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN750"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN751"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_24'>Deut. 11. 24</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_4'>Josh. 1. 4</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_7'>Judith 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN752"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_21"><span class="notemark">nn</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_53'>ver. 53</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_56'>56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN753"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_55'>ver. 55</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_12'>Ps. 79. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN754"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN755"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_29"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_21'>Isai. 13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN756"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_30"><span class="notemark">r</span> 15.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN757"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_31"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_21'>Isai. 13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN758"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_31"><span class="notemark">r</span> 15.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN759"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_32"><span class="notemark">r</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN760"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>against</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN761"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_35"><span class="notemark">s</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_29'>Matt. 24. 29</a>. See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_13'>Rev. 6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN762"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_35"><span class="notemark">t</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_13'>ver. 13</a> (Lat.), <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_39'>39</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_40'>40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN763"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_35"><span class="notemark">u</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_20'>Rev. 14. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN764"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>pastern</span>, or, <span class='add'>litter</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN765"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_39"><span class="notemark">x</span> 15.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN766"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_39"><span class="notemark">t</span> 15.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_13'>ver. 13</a> (Lat.), <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_39'>39</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_40'>40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN767"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_40"><span class="notemark">x</span> 15.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN768"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_40"><span class="notemark">t</span> 15.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_13'>ver. 13</a> (Lat.), <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_39'>39</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_40'>40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN769"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_40"><span class="notemark">y</span> 15.40</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_13'>ver. 13</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN770"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>destroy</span>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_18'>ver. 18</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_60'>60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN771"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_43"><span class="notemark">z</span> 15.43</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_45'>ver. 45</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN772"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_44"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.44</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_40'>ver. 40</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_41'>41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN773"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_44"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.44</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_3'>Rev. 19. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN774"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_44"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_9'>Rev. 18. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN775"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_45"><span class="notemark">z</span> 15.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_45'>ver. 45</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN776"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_46"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_1'>ch. 16. 1</a>. See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_6'>1 Macc. 8. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN777"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>like unto Babylon</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN778"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_49"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_7'>Rev. 18. 7</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN779"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_50"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_30'>Job 15. 30</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS90_6'>Ps. 90. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN780"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_52"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.52</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_48'>ch. 16. 48</a> (Lat.). <a href='NAM.xhtml#NM1_2'>Nah. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN781"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_53"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_21'>ver. 21</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_56'>56</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_73'>ch. 16. 73</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN782"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. <span class='add'>death</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN783"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_53"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.53</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV17_6'>Rev. 17. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN784"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_54"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_30'>Jer. 4. 30</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_50'>ch. 16. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN785"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_55"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN786"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_56"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_21'>ver. 21</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_56'>56</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_73'>ch. 16. 73</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN787"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_58"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.58</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_53'>Deut. 28. 53</a> and references.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN788"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_60"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_68'>ch. 16. 68</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN789"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_60"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.60</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_60'>ver. 60</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_24'>Isai. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN790"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_61"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_14'>Isai. 47. 14</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_6'>ch. 16. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN791"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_63"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.63</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_1'>ch. 5. 1</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN792"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_63"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>blemish</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN793"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_63"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_60'>ver. 60</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_24'>Isai. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN794"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E215_63"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_60'>ver. 60</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_24'>Isai. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN795"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_46'>ch. 15. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN796"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_11'>ch. 15. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN797"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_31'>1 Kin. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN798"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_12'>Rev. 6. 12</a>. See <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC13_4'>Zech. 13. 4</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN799"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN800"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN801"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_61'>ch. 15. 61</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN802"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN803"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN804"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN805"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_14'>2 Sam. 22. 14</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN806"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_14'>2 Sam. 22. 14</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN807"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_12"><span class="notemark">j</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_8'>2 Sam. 22. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN808"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS77_16'>Ps. 77. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN809"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_10'>Isai. 2. 10</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_19'>19</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN810"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS89_13'>Ps. 89. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_21'>Wisd. 5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN811"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_14'>2 Sam. 22. 14</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN812"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS45_5'>Ps. 45. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN813"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_15"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN814"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_33'>Isai. 30. 33</a>. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_47'>Ezek. 20. 47</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_48'>48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN815"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_16"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN816"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_8'>Matt. 24. 8</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_8'>Mark 13. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN817"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_35'>Rom. 8. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN818"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>plagues</span>. Lat. of <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_5'>ch. 15. 5</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_27'>27</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_49'>49</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_59'>59</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_5'>ver. 5</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_8'>8</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_14'>14</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_16'>16</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_37'>37</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_39'>39</a>: not as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_12'>ch. 15. 12</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN819"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_37'>2 Kin. 9. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN820"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_26"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB24_11'>Job 24. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN821"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_28"><span class="notemark">t</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_3'>Amos 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN822"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_28"><span class="notemark">u</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_21'>Isai. 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN823"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_29"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS17_6'>Isai. 17. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_13'>24. 13</a>. So <a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_5'>Obad. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN824"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_30"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS17_6'>Isai. 17. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_13'>24. 13</a>. So <a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_5'>Obad. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN825"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_31"><span class="notemark">y</span> 16.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_3'>Amos 1. 3</a>, <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_6'>6</a>, <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_9'>9</a>, <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN826"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_33"><span class="notemark">z</span> 16.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_63'>Ps. 78. 63</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN827"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_35"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS113_1'>Ps. 113. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN828"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_38"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.38</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR50_43'>Jer 50. 43</a>. See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_24'>Jer. 6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN829"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_40"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.40</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_9'>Gen. 47. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN830"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_41"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.41</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_44'>ver. 44</a>, comp. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_29'>1 Cor. 7. 29–31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN831"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_42"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.42</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_9'>Ezek. 27. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN832"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.46</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>for</span>]. Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_41'>Deut. 28. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN833"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_47"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.47</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_9'>Ezek. 27. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN834"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_48"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.48</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_52'>ch. 15. 52</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN835"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_49"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_50'>ver. 50</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN836"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_49"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.49</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS46_5'>Ps. 46. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_14'>139. 14</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN837"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_50"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_50'>ver. 50</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN838"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_50"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_54'>ch. 15. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN839"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_52"><span class="notemark">j</span> 16.52</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_37'>Heb. 10. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN840"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_53"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_35'>Jer. 2. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN841"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_53"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_22'>Prov. 25. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN842"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_53"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_35'>Jer. 2. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN843"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_54"><span class="notemark">z</span> 16.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN844"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_54"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.54</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_15'>Luke 16. 15</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_7'>1 Sam. 16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN845"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_55"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_1'>Gen. 1. 1</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_5'>Ps. 148. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN846"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_56"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_4'>Ps. 147. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN847"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_57"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.57</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_12'>Isai. 40. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN848"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_58"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.58</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB26_10'>Job 26. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN849"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_58"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.58</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB26_7'>Job 26. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN850"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_58"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.58</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_2'>Ps. 24. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN851"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_59"><span class="notemark">t</span> 16.59</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_8'>Job 9. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN852"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_59"><span class="notemark">u</span> 16.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_7'>Gen. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN853"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_60"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.60</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_35'>Ps. 107. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN854"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_61"><span class="notemark">y</span> 16.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>Gen. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN855"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_63"><span class="notemark">z</span> 16.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Lat. as <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN856"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_65"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.65</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CO.xhtml#C14_5'>1 Cor. 4. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN857"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_66"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.66</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_31'>Matt. 25. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN858"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_67"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.67</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS75_7'>Ps. 75. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN859"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_67"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.67</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_18'>2 Tim. 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN860"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_68"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.68</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>being unable to resist</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN861"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_68"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.68</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_60'>ch. 15. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN862"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_68"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.68</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_29'>Acts 15. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN863"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_72"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.72</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_32'>John 16. 32</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN864"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_73"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.73</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_53'>ch. 15. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN865"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_73"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.73</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_7'>1 Pet. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN866"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_74"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.74</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_18'>2 Tim. 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN867"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_75"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.75</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS48_14'>Ps. 48. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN868"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_76"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.76</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS38_4'>Ps. 38. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN869"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_77"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.77</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_5'>Prov. 22. 5</a>. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_6'>Hos. 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN870"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#E216_78"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.78</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shut out</span>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

