<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE 2 Timothy 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Timothy</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='T20_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO TIMOTHY  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='T21_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="T21_1">1&#160;</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus,
<span class="verse" id="T21_2">2&#160;</span>To Timothy, <span class='add'>my</span> dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, <span class='add'>and</span> peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
<span class="verse" id="T21_3">3&#160;</span> I thank God, whom I serve from <span class='add'>my</span> forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day;
<span class="verse" id="T21_4">4&#160;</span> Greatly desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;
<span class="verse" id="T21_5">5&#160;</span> When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thee also.
<span class="verse" id="T21_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.
<span class="verse" id="T21_7">7&#160;</span> For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>and of love, and of a sound mind.
<span class="verse" id="T21_8">8&#160;</span>Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God;
<span class="verse" id="T21_9">9&#160;</span> Who hath saved us, and called <span class='add'>us</span> with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,
<span class="verse" id="T21_10">10&#160;</span> But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel:
<span class="verse" id="T21_11">11&#160;</span> Whereunto I am appointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="T21_12">12&#160;</span> For the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>believed, and <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.
<span class="verse" id="T21_13">13&#160;</span> Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="T21_14">14&#160;</span> That good thing which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us.
<span class="verse" id="T21_15">15&#160;</span> This thou knowest, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
<span class="verse" id="T21_16">16&#160;</span> The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain:
<span class="verse" id="T21_17">17&#160;</span> But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found <span class='add'>me</span>.
<span class="verse" id="T21_18">18&#160;</span> The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='T22_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_1">1&#160;</span> Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="T22_2">2&#160;</span> And the things that thou hast heard of me <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.
<span class="verse" id="T22_3">3&#160;</span> Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="T22_4">4&#160;</span> No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of <span class='add'>this</span> life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier.
<span class="verse" id="T22_5">5&#160;</span> And if a man also strive for masteries, <span class='add'>yet</span> is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully.
<span class="verse" id="T22_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits.
<span class="verse" id="T22_7">7&#160;</span> Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.
<span class="verse" id="T22_8">8&#160;</span> Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel:
<span class="verse" id="T22_9">9&#160;</span> Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer, <span class='add'>even</span> unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound.
<span class="verse" id="T22_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
<span class="verse" id="T22_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> a faithful saying: For if we be dead with <span class='add'>him</span>, we shall also live with <span class='add'>him</span>:
<span class="verse" id="T22_12">12&#160;</span> If we suffer, we shall also reign with <span class='add'>him</span>: if we deny <span class='add'>him</span>, he also will deny us:
<span class="verse" id="T22_13">13&#160;</span> If we believe not, <span class='add'>yet</span> he abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself.
<span class="verse" id="T22_14">14&#160;</span> Of these things put <span class='add'>them</span> in remembrance, charging <span class='add'>them</span> before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, <span class='add'>but</span> to the subverting of the hearers.
<span class="verse" id="T22_15">15&#160;</span> Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.
<span class="verse" id="T22_16">16&#160;</span> But shun profane <span class='add'>and</span> vain babblings: for they will increase unto more ungodliness.
<span class="verse" id="T22_17">17&#160;</span> And their word will eat as doth a <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>canker: of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;
<span class="verse" id="T22_18">18&#160;</span> Who concerning the truth have erred, saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some.
<span class="verse" id="T22_19">19&#160;</span> Nevertheless the foundation of God standeth <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sure, having <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="T22_20">20&#160;</span> But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour.
<span class="verse" id="T22_21">21&#160;</span> If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master’s use, <span class='add'>and</span> prepared unto every good work.
<span class="verse" id="T22_22">22&#160;</span> Flee also youthful lusts: but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
<span class="verse" id="T22_23">23&#160;</span> But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes.
<span class="verse" id="T22_24">24&#160;</span> And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all <span class='add'>men</span>, apt to teach, <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>patient,
<span class="verse" id="T22_25">25&#160;</span> In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth;
<span class="verse" id="T22_26">26&#160;</span> And <span class='add'>that</span> they may <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taken captive by him at his will.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='T23_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T23_1">1&#160;</span> This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.
<span class="verse" id="T23_2">2&#160;</span> For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
<span class="verse" id="T23_3">3&#160;</span> Without natural affection, trucebreakers, <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
<span class="verse" id="T23_4">4&#160;</span> Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;
<span class="verse" id="T23_5">5&#160;</span> Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away.
<span class="verse" id="T23_6">6&#160;</span> For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts,
<span class="verse" id="T23_7">7&#160;</span> Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
<span class="verse" id="T23_8">8&#160;</span> Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>reprobate concerning the faith.
<span class="verse" id="T23_9">9&#160;</span> But they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all <span class='add'>men</span>, as theirs also was.
<span class="verse" id="T23_10">10&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity, patience,
<span class="verse" id="T23_11">11&#160;</span> Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of <span class='add'>them</span> all the Lord delivered me.
<span class="verse" id="T23_12">12&#160;</span> Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.
<span class="verse" id="T23_13">13&#160;</span> But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.
<span class="verse" id="T23_14">14&#160;</span> But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned <span class='add'>them</span>;
<span class="verse" id="T23_15">15&#160;</span> And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="T23_16">16&#160;</span> All scripture <span class='add'>is</span> given by inspiration of God, and <span class='add'>is</span> profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:
<span class="verse" id="T23_17">17&#160;</span> That the man of God may be perfect, <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>throughly furnished unto all good works.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='T24_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_1">1&#160;</span> I charge <span class='add'>thee</span> therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom;
<span class="verse" id="T24_2">2&#160;</span> Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine.
<span class="verse" id="T24_3">3&#160;</span> For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears;
<span class="verse" id="T24_4">4&#160;</span> And they shall turn away <span class='add'>their</span> ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.
<span class="verse" id="T24_5">5&#160;</span> But watch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>make full proof of thy ministry.
<span class="verse" id="T24_6">6&#160;</span> For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand.
<span class="verse" id="T24_7">7&#160;</span> I have fought a good fight, I have finished <span class='add'>my</span> course, I have kept the faith:
<span class="verse" id="T24_8">8&#160;</span> Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>all them also that love his appearing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_9">9&#160;</span> Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me:
<span class="verse" id="T24_10">10&#160;</span> For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.
<span class="verse" id="T24_11">11&#160;</span> Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry.
<span class="verse" id="T24_12">12&#160;</span> And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus.
<span class="verse" id="T24_13">13&#160;</span> The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring <span class='add'>with thee</span>, <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>and the books, <span class='add'>but</span> especially the parchments.
<span class="verse" id="T24_14">14&#160;</span> Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him according to his works:
<span class="verse" id="T24_15">15&#160;</span> Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstood <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>our words.
<span class="verse" id="T24_16">16&#160;</span> At my first answer no man stood with me, but all <span class='add'>men</span> forsook me: <span class='add'>I pray God</span> that it may not be laid to their charge.
<span class="verse" id="T24_17">17&#160;</span> Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and <span class='add'>that</span> all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
<span class="verse" id="T24_18">18&#160;</span> And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve <span class='add'>me</span> unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom <span class='add'>be</span> glory for ever and ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_19">19&#160;</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus.
<span class="verse" id="T24_20">20&#160;</span> Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.
<span class="verse" id="T24_21">21&#160;</span> Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brethren.
<span class="verse" id="T24_22">22&#160;</span> The Lord Jesus Christ <span class='add'>be</span> with thy spirit. Grace <span class='add'>be</span> with you. Amen. </div>
<div class='s'>The second <span class='add'>epistle</span> unto Timotheus, ordained the first bishop of the church of the Ephesians, was written from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the second time. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T21_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> and]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T21_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">trusted.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T21_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 I am]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">by.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or <span class="add">The husbandman, labouring first, must be partaker of the fruits.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">gangrene.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">steady.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the seal]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">forbearing.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">awake.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">taken alive.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T23_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">makebates.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T23_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">of no judgment.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T23_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">thou hast been a diligent follower of.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T23_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">perfected.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T24_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">fulfil.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T24_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> all]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T24_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> and the books]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T24_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">our preachings.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
