<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 3 John 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>3 John</a></li>
</ul>
<div class='main' id='J30_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE THIRD EPISTLE OF JOHN  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='J31_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="J31_1">1&#160;</span> The elder unto the wellbeloved Gaius, whom I love <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in the truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="J31_2">2&#160;</span> Beloved, I <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth.
<span class="verse" id="J31_3">3&#160;</span> For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth.
<span class="verse" id="J31_4">4&#160;</span> I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth.
<span class="verse" id="J31_5">5&#160;</span> Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the brethren, and to strangers;
<span class="verse" id="J31_6">6&#160;</span> Which have borne witness of thy charity before the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do well:
<span class="verse" id="J31_7">7&#160;</span> Because that for his name’s sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="J31_8">8&#160;</span> We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers to the truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="J31_9">9&#160;</span> I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the preeminence among them, receiveth us not.
<span class="verse" id="J31_10">10&#160;</span> Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that would, and casteth <span class='add'>them</span> out of the church. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="J31_11">11&#160;</span> Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He that doeth good is of God: but he that doeth evil hath not seen God.
<span class="verse" id="J31_12">12&#160;</span> Demetrius hath good report of all <span class='add'>men</span>, and of the truth itself: yea, and we <span class='add'>also</span> bear record; and ye know that our record is true. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="J31_13">13&#160;</span> I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write unto thee:
<span class="verse" id="J31_14">14&#160;</span> But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall speak <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>face to face. Peace <span class='add'>be</span> to thee. <span class='add'>Our</span> friends salute thee. Greet the friends by name. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#J31_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">truly.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#J31_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">pray.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#J31_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">mouth to mouth.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
