<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Amos 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Amos</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM9_0'>9</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='AM0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Amos  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="AM1_1">1&#160;</span> The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>earthquake.
<span class="verse" id="AM1_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM1_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of Damascus, <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and for four, I will not <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_4">4&#160;</span> But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
<span class="verse" id="AM1_5">5&#160;</span> I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the plain of Aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the house of Eden: and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gaza, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because they <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>carried away captive the whole captivity, to deliver <span class='add'>them</span> up to Edom:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_7">7&#160;</span> But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_8">8&#160;</span> And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will turn mine hand against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM1_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the brotherly covenant:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_10">10&#160;</span> But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the palaces thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM1_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>he kept his wrath for ever:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_12">12&#160;</span> But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM1_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because they have <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_14">14&#160;</span> But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind:
<span class="verse" id="AM1_15">15&#160;</span> And their king shall go into captivity, he and his princes together, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM2_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because he <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime:
<span class="verse" id="AM2_2">2&#160;</span> But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth: and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, <span class='add'>and</span> with the sound of the trumpet:
<span class="verse" id="AM2_3">3&#160;</span> And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will slay all the princes thereof with him, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM2_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because they have despised the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after the which their fathers have walked:
<span class="verse" id="AM2_5">5&#160;</span> But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM2_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; For three transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away <span class='add'>the punishment</span> thereof; because <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes;
<span class="verse" id="AM2_7">7&#160;</span> That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the meek: and a man and his father will go in unto the <span class='add'>same</span> <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>maid, to profane my holy name:
<span class="verse" id="AM2_8">8&#160;</span>And they lay <span class='add'>themselves</span> down upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar, and they drink the wine of <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the condemned <span class='add'>in</span> the house of their god.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM2_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Yet destroyed I the <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Amorite before them, whose height <span class='add'>was</span> like the height of the cedars, and he <span class='add'>was</span> strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.
<span class="verse" id="AM2_10">10&#160;</span> Also <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.
<span class="verse" id="AM2_11">11&#160;</span> And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. <span class='add'>Is it</span> not even thus, O ye children of Israel? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM2_12">12&#160;</span> But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink; and commanded the prophets, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>saying, Prophesy not.
<span class="verse" id="AM2_13">13&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed <span class='add'>that is</span> full of sheaves.
<span class="verse" id="AM2_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>himself:
<span class="verse" id="AM2_15">15&#160;</span> Neither shall he stand that handleth the bow; and <span class='add'>he that is</span> swift of foot shall not deliver <span class='add'>himself:</span> neither shall he that rideth the horse deliver himself.
<span class="verse" id="AM2_16">16&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he that is</span> <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM3_1">1&#160;</span> Hear this word that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying,
<span class="verse" id="AM3_2">2&#160;</span> You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punish you for all your iniquities.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_3">3&#160;</span> Can two walk together, except they be agreed?
<span class="verse" id="AM3_4">4&#160;</span> Will a lion roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? will a young lion <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?
<span class="verse" id="AM3_5">5&#160;</span> Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no gin <span class='add'>is</span> for him? shall <span class='add'>one</span> take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?
<span class="verse" id="AM3_6">6&#160;</span> Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>not be afraid? shall there be evil in a city, <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not done <span class='add'>it</span>?<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="AM3_7">7&#160;</span> Surely the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_8">8&#160;</span> The lion hath roared, who will not fear? the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> hath spoken, who can but prophesy? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM3_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oppressed in the midst thereof.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_10">10&#160;</span> For they know not to do right, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who store up violence and <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>robbery in their palaces.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; An adversary <span class='add'>there shall be</span> even round about the land; and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoiled.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_12">12&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; As the shepherd <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shall the children of Israel be taken out that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in Damascus <span class='add'>in</span> a couch.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_13">13&#160;</span> Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, the God of hosts,
<span class="verse" id="AM3_14">14&#160;</span> That in the day that I shall <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>visit the transgressions of Israel upon him I will also visit the altars of Beth-el: and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground.
<span class="verse" id="AM3_15">15&#160;</span> And I will smite the winter house with the summer house; and the houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM4_1">1&#160;</span> Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that <span class='add'>are</span> in the mountain of Samaria, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_2">2&#160;</span> The Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> hath sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with fishhooks.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_3">3&#160;</span> And ye shall go out at the breaches, every <span class='add'>cow at that which is</span> before her; and <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ye shall cast <span class='add'>them</span> into the palace, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Come to Beth-el, and transgress; at Gilgal multiply transgression; and bring your sacrifices every morning, <span class='add'>and</span> your tithes after <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>three years:
<span class="verse" id="AM4_5">5&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim <span class='add'>and</span> publish the free offerings: for <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>this liketh you, O ye children of Israel, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM4_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_7">7&#160;</span> And also I have withholden the rain from you, when <span class='add'>there were</span> yet three months to the harvest: and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_8">8&#160;</span> So two <span class='add'>or</span> three cities wandered unto one city, to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_9">9&#160;</span> I have smitten you with blasting and mildew: <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees increased, the palmerworm devoured <span class='add'>them:</span> yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_10">10&#160;</span> I have sent among you the pestilence <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the sword, <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and have taken away your horses; and I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_11">11&#160;</span> I have overthrown <span class='add'>some</span> of you, as God overthrew <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: <span class='add'>and</span> because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
<span class="verse" id="AM4_13">13&#160;</span> For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wind, and declareth unto man what <span class='add'>is</span> his thought, that maketh the morning darkness, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The God of hosts, <span class='add'>is</span> his name.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM5_1">1&#160;</span> Hear ye this word which I take up against you, <span class='add'>even</span> a lamentation, O house of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_2">2&#160;</span> The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; <span class='add'>there is</span> none to raise her up.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_3">3&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; The city that went out <span class='add'>by</span> a thousand shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth <span class='add'>by</span> an hundred shall leave ten, to the house of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM5_4">4&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye shall live:
<span class="verse" id="AM5_5">5&#160;</span> But seek not <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Beth-el, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to Beer-sheba: for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Beth-el shall come to nought.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_6">6&#160;</span> Seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and ye shall live; lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour <span class='add'>it</span>, and <span class='add'>there be</span> none to quench <span class='add'>it</span> in Beth-el.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_7">7&#160;</span> Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the earth,
<span class="verse" id="AM5_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Seek him</span> that maketh the <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>seven stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night: that <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his name:
<span class="verse" id="AM5_9">9&#160;</span> That strengtheneth the <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled shall come against the fortress.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_10">10&#160;</span> They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_11">11&#160;</span> Forasmuch therefore as your treading <span class='add'>is</span> upon the poor, and ye take from him burdens of wheat: <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them; ye have planted <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_12">12&#160;</span> For I know your manifold transgressions and your mighty sins: they afflict the just, they take <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate <span class='add'>from their right</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time; for it <span class='add'>is</span> an evil time.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_14">14&#160;</span> Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye have spoken.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM5_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of hosts, the Lord, saith thus; Wailing <span class='add'>shall be</span> in all streets; and they shall say in all the highways, Alas! alas! and they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_17">17&#160;</span> And in all vineyards <span class='add'>shall be</span> wailing: for I will pass through thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Woe unto you that desire the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>! to what end <span class='add'>is</span> it for you? the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> darkness, and not light.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_19">19&#160;</span> As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Shall</span> not the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no brightness in it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM5_21">21&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>smell in your solemn assemblies.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_22">22&#160;</span> Though ye offer me burnt offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept <span class='add'>them:</span> neither will I regard the <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>peace offerings of your fat beasts.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_23">23&#160;</span> Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_24">24&#160;</span> But let judgment <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="AM5_26">26&#160;</span> But ye have borne <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="AM5_27">27&#160;</span> Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, whose name <span class='add'>is</span> The God of hosts.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM6_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Woe to them <span class='add'>that <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>are</span> at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, <span class='add'>which are</span> named <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came!
<span class="verse" id="AM6_2">2&#160;</span> Pass ye unto Calneh, and see; and from thence go ye to Hamath the great: then go down to Gath of the Philistines: <span class='add'>be they</span> better than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your border?
<span class="verse" id="AM6_3">3&#160;</span> Ye that <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>put far away the <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evil day, and cause the <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seat of violence to come near;
<span class="verse" id="AM6_4">4&#160;</span> That lie upon beds of ivory, and <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall;
<span class="verse" id="AM6_5">5&#160;</span> That <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>chant to the sound of the viol, <span class='add'>and</span> invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David;
<span class="verse" id="AM6_6">6&#160;</span> That drink <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>affliction of Joseph.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM6_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM6_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> hath sworn by himself, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the God of hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver up the city with <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all that is therein.
<span class="verse" id="AM6_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.
<span class="verse" id="AM6_10">10&#160;</span> And a man’s uncle shall take him up, and he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that <span class='add'>is</span> by the sides of the house, <span class='add'>Is there</span> yet <span class='add'>any</span> with thee? and he shall say, No. Then shall he say, <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hold thy tongue: for <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>we may not make mention of the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM6_11">11&#160;</span> For, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commandeth, and he will smite the great house with <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>breaches, and the little house with clefts.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM6_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Shall horses run upon the rock? will <span class='add'>one</span> plow <span class='add'>there</span> with oxen? for ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock:
<span class="verse" id="AM6_13">13&#160;</span> Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?
<span class="verse" id="AM6_14">14&#160;</span> But, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the God of hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in of Hemath unto the <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>river of the wilderness.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM7_1">1&#160;</span> Thus hath the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth; and, lo, <span class='add'>it was</span> the latter growth after the king’s mowings.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_2">2&#160;</span>And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, forgive, I beseech thee: <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by whom shall Jacob arise? for he <span class='add'>is</span> small.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> repented for this: It shall not be, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM7_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Thus hath the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> shewed unto me: and, behold, the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat up a part.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_5">5&#160;</span> Then said I, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, cease, I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he <span class='add'>is</span> small.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_6">6&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> repented for this: This also shall not be, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM7_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Thus he shewed me: and, behold, the Lord stood upon a wall <span class='add'>made</span> by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A plumbline. Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumbline in the midst of my people Israel: I will not again pass by them any more:
<span class="verse" id="AM7_9">9&#160;</span> And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM7_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Then Amaziah the priest of Beth-el sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel: the land is not able to bear all his words.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_11">11&#160;</span> For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out of their own land.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_12">12&#160;</span> Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there:
<span class="verse" id="AM7_13">13&#160;</span> But prophesy not again any more at Beth-el: for it <span class='add'>is</span> the king’s <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>chapel, and it <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>king’s court.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM7_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I <span class='add'>was</span> no prophet, neither <span class='add'>was</span> I a prophet’s son; but I <span class='add'>was</span> an herdman, and a gatherer of <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sycomore fruit:
<span class="verse" id="AM7_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> took me <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as I followed the flock, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM7_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Now therefore hear thou the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and drop not <span class='add'>thy word</span> against the house of Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="AM7_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land: and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth of his land.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM8_1">1&#160;</span> Thus hath the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> shewed unto me: and behold a basket of summer fruit.
<span class="verse" id="AM8_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, Amos, what seest thou? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel; I will not again pass by them any more.
<span class="verse" id="AM8_3">3&#160;</span> And the songs of the <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>temple <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be howlings in that day, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: <span class='add'>there shall be</span> many dead bodies in every place; they shall cast <span class='add'>them</span> forth <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with silence.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM8_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the land to fail,
<span class="verse" id="AM8_5">5&#160;</span> Saying, When will the <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>falsifying the balances by deceit?
<span class="verse" id="AM8_6">6&#160;</span> That we may buy the poor for <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; <span class='add'>yea</span>, and sell the refuse of the wheat?
<span class="verse" id="AM8_7">7&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.
<span class="verse" id="AM8_8">8&#160;</span> Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall be cast out and drowned, as <span class='add'>by</span> the flood of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="AM8_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day:
<span class="verse" id="AM8_10">10&#160;</span> And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only <span class='add'>son</span>, and the end thereof as a bitter day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM8_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the days come, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="AM8_12">12&#160;</span> And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and shall not find <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM8_13">13&#160;</span> In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst.
<span class="verse" id="AM8_14">14&#160;</span> They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan, liveth; and, The manner of Beer-sheba liveth; even they shall fall, and never rise up again.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='AM9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM9_1">1&#160;</span> I saw the Lord standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lintel of the door, that the posts may shake: and <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cut them in the head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down:
<span class="verse" id="AM9_3">3&#160;</span> And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them:
<span class="verse" id="AM9_4">4&#160;</span> And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_5">5&#160;</span> And the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> he that toucheth the land, and it shall melt, and all that <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall rise up wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as <span class='add'>by</span> the flood of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> he that buildeth his <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stories in the heaven, and hath founded his <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>troop in the earth; he that <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his name.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Are</span> ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?
<span class="verse" id="AM9_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, the eyes of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> <span class='add'>are</span> upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_9">9&#160;</span> For, lo, I will command, and I will <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as <span class='add'>corn</span> is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grain fall upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_10">10&#160;</span> All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AM9_11">11&#160;</span>¶ In that day will I raise up the <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tabernacle of David that is fallen, and <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old:
<span class="verse" id="AM9_12">12&#160;</span> That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which are called by my name, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that doeth this.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_13">13&#160;</span> Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_14">14&#160;</span> And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit <span class='add'>them;</span> and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.
<span class="verse" id="AM9_15">15&#160;</span> And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC14_5'>14 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_30'>25. 30</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_16'>3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, yea, for four.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_6'>6,</a> &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Bilathaven.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Betheden.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R228_18'>28. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, carried them away with an entire captivity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the covenant of brethren.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. corrupted his compassions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits he]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, divided the mountains.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K23_27'>3. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM8_6'>8 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, young woman.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, such as have fined, or, muleted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_24'>21 24</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_31'>2. 31</a> Josh <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_8'>24. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_51'>12. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM7_12'>7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I will press your place, as a cart full of sheaves presseth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his soul, or, life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM2_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strong of his heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visit upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. give forth his voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, not run together.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">and shall not the <span class="nd">Lord</span> do</span> somewhat?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, oppressions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spoil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb delivereth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, on the bed's feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM3_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, punish Israel for.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ye shall cast away the things of the palace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. three years of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. offer by burning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. so ye love.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the multitude of your gardens, &amp;c. did the palmerworm, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in the way.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb with the captivity of your horses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>19. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM4_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM4_4'>4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_9'>9 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_31'>38. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM9_6'>9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spoil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Zeph <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP1_13'>1. 13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vineyards of desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a ransom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_14'>34. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS97_10'>97. 10</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_9'>12. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_19'>5. 19</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_7'>30. 7</a> Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_2'>2. 2</a>. Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP1_15'>1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_11'>1. 11</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_20'>6. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, smell your holy days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thank offerings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. roll.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_42'>7. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM5_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Siccuth your king.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_24'>6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, are secure.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_5'>19. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, first-fruits.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK12_27'>12. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_18'>5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, habitation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, abound with superfluities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, quaver.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in bowls of wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breach.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_14'>51. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fulness thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_13'>5. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they will not, or, have not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, droppings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM6_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valley.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, green worms.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, who of (or, for) Jacob shall stand?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sanctuary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb house of the kingdom</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wild figs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from behind.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM7_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK21_2'>21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Temples]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall howl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be silent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, month.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. open.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. perverting the balances of deceit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM8_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM2_6'>2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, chapiter, or, knop</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wound them</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_8'>139. 8</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR44_11'>44. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 dwelleth]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spheres.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb ascensions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_3'>104. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bundle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_8'>5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR47_4'>47. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cause to move.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_16'>15. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hedge, or, wall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon whom my name is called.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. draweth forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, new wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AM9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_18'>3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
