<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Baruch 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Baruch</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_0'>6</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='BR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Baruch  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='BR1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="BR1_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>And these are the words of the book, which <a href='#FN2'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Baruch the son of <a href='#FN3'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Nerias, the son of Maasias, the son of Sedecias, the son of Asadias, the son of Chelcias, wrote in Babylon, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_2">2&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN4'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the fifth year, and <a href='#FN5'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>in the seventh day of the month, what time as the Chaldeans took Jerusalem, and burnt it with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_3">3&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN6'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Baruch did read the words of this book in the hearing of <a href='#FN7'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Jechonias the son of <a href='#FN8'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Joachim king of Juda, and in the ears of all the people that came to hear the book, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_4">4&#160;</span>And in the hearing of the nobles, and of the king’s sons, and in the hearing of the elders, and of all the people, <a href='#FN9'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>from the lowest unto the highest, even of all them that dwelt at Babylon by the river Sud. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_5">5&#160;</span>Whereupon they wept, fasted, <a href='#FN10'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and prayed before the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_6">6&#160;</span>They made also a collection of money <a href='#FN11'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>according to every man’s power: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_7">7&#160;</span>And they sent it to Jerusalem unto <a href='#FN12'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Joachim the high priest, the son of <a href='#FN13'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Chelcias, son of <a href='#FN14'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Salom, and to the priests, and to all the people which were found with him at Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_8">8&#160;</span>At the same time when he received <a href='#FN15'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the vessels of the house of the Lord, that were carried out of the temple, to return them into the land of Juda, the tenth day of the month <a href='#FN16'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Sivan, namely, <a href='#FN17'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>silver vessels, which <a href='#FN18'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Sedecias the son of Josias king of Jada had made, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_9">9&#160;</span>After that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon <a href='#FN19'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>had carried away <a href='#FN20'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Jechonias, and the princes, and the <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>captives, and the mighty men, and the people of the land, from Jerusalem, and brought them unto Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_10">10&#160;</span>And they said, Behold, we have sent you <a href='#FN22'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>money to buy you <a href='#FN23'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>burnt offerings, and <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>sin offerings, and <a href='#FN25'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>incense, and prepare ye <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>manna, and offer upon the altar of the Lord our God; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_11">11&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and for the life of <a href='#FN28'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Balthasar his son, that their days may be upon earth as <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the days of heaven: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_12">12&#160;</span>And the Lord will give us strength, and lighten our eyes, and we shall live <a href='#FN30'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>under the shadow of Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and under the shadow of <a href='#FN31'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Balthasar his son, and we shall serve them many days, and <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>find favour in their sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_13">13&#160;</span>Pray for us also unto the Lord our God, for we have sinned against the Lord our God; and unto this day the fury of the Lord and his wrath is not turned from us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_14">14&#160;</span>And ye shall read <a href='#FN33'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>this book which we have sent unto you, to make confession in the house of the Lord, upon the feasts and solemn days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_15">15&#160;</span>And ye shall say, <a href='#FN34'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>To the Lord our God belongeth righteousness, but unto us <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the confusion of faces, <a href='#FN36'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>as it is come to pass this day, unto them of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_16">16&#160;</span>And to our <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>kings, and to our princes, and to our priests, and to our prophets, and to our fathers: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_17">17&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>we have sinned before the Lord, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>And disobeyed him, and <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>have not hearkened unto the voice of the Lord our God, <a href='#FN41'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>to walk in the commandments that he gave us openly: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_19">19&#160;</span>Since the day that the Lord brought our forefathers out of the land of Egypt, unto this present day, we have been disobedient unto the Lord our God, and we have been negligent in not hearing his voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_20">20&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN42'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the evils cleaved unto us, and <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the curse, which the Lord appointed by Moses his servant at the time that he brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt, to give us <a href='#FN44'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>a land that floweth with milk and honey, like <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>as it is to see this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Nevertheless we have not hearkened unto the voice of the Lord our God, <a href='#FN47'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>according unto all the words of the prophets, whom he sent unto us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR1_22">22&#160;</span>But every man followed the imagination of his own wicked heart, to serve <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>strange gods, and to do evil in the sight of the Lord our God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='BR2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_1">1&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the Lord hath made good his word, which he pronounced against us, and against our judges that judged Israel, and against our kings, and against our princes, and against the men of Israel and Juda, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_2">2&#160;</span>To bring upon us great plagues, such as never happened under the whole heaven, as it came to pass in Jerusalem, <a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>according to the things that were written in the law of Moses; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>That a man should eat the flesh of his own son, and the flesh of his own daughter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_4">4&#160;</span>Moreover he hath delivered them to be in subjection to <a href='#FN52'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>all the kingdoms that are round about us, <a href='#FN53'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>to be as a reproach and <a href='#FN54'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>desolation among all the people round about, where the Lord hath scattered them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_5">5&#160;</span>Thus we <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>were cast down, and not exalted, because we have sinned against the Lord our God, and have not been obedient unto his voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>To the Lord our God appertaineth righteousness: but unto us and to our fathers open shame, <a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>as appeareth this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_7">7&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a><a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>all these plagues are come upon us, which the Lord hath pronounced against us </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Yet have we not prayed before the Lord, that we might turn every one from the imaginations of his wicked heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Wherefore the Lord watched over us for evil, and the Lord hath brought it upon us: for <a href='#FN62'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the Lord is righteous in all his works which he hath commanded us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Yet we have not hearkened unto his voice, <a href='#FN65'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>to walk in the commandments of the Lord, that he hath set before us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>And now, O Lord God of Israel, that hast brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and high arm, and with signs, and with wonders, and with great power, and <a href='#FN67'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>hast gotten thyself a name, <a href='#FN68'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>as appeareth this day: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_12">12&#160;</span>O Lord our God, <a href='#FN69'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a><a href='#FN70'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>we have sinned, we have done ungodly, we have dealt unrighteously in all thine ordinances. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Let thy wrath turn from us: <a href='#FN72'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>for we are but a few left among the heathen, where thou hast scattered us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Hear our prayers, O Lord, and our petitions, and deliver us for thine own sake, and <a href='#FN74'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>give us favour in the sight of them which have led us away: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>That all the earth may know that thou art the Lord our God, because <a href='#FN76'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN77'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Israel and his posterity is called by thy name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_16">16&#160;</span>O Lord, <a href='#FN78'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>look down from thine holy house, and consider us: <a href='#FN79'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>bow down thine ear, O Lord, to hear us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_17">17&#160;</span>Open thine eyes, and behold; <a href='#FN80'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>for the dead that are in the graves, whose <a href='#FN81'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>souls are taken from their bodies, will give unto the Lord neither praise nor righteousness: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_18">18&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN82'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the soul that is greatly vexed, which goeth stooping and feeble, and the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul, will give thee praise and righteousness, O Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Therefore we do not make our humble supplication before thee, O Lord our God, for the righteousness of our fathers, and of our kings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_20">20&#160;</span>For thou hast sent out thy wrath and indignation upon us, <a href='#FN84'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>as thou hast spoken by thy servants the prophets, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_21">21&#160;</span>Thus saith the Lord, Bow down your shoulders to serve the king of Babylon: so shall ye remain in the land that I gave unto your fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_22">22&#160;</span>But if ye will not hear the voice of the Lord, to serve the king of Babylon, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>I will cause to cease out of the cites of Judah, and from without Jerusalem, the voice of <a href='#FN86'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>mirth, and the voice of <a href='#FN87'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ee</a>joy, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: and the whole land shall be <a href='#FN88'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>desolate of inhabitants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_24">24&#160;</span>But we would not hearken unto thy voice, to serve the king of Babylon: therefore hast thou <a href='#FN89'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>made good the words that thou spakest by thy servants the prophets, namely, <a href='#FN90'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>that the bones of our kings, and the bones of our fathers, should be taken out of their place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_25">25&#160;</span>And, lo,<a href='#FN91'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a><a href='#FN92'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a> they are cast out to the heat of the day, and to the frost of the night, and they died in great miseries<a href='#FN93'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a> by famine, by sword, and by pestilence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_26">26&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN94'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the house which is called by thy name hast thou laid waste, <a href='#FN95'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>as it is to be seen this day, for the wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of Juda. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_27">27&#160;</span>O Lord our God, thou hast dealt with us after all thy <a href='#FN96'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>goodness, and according to all that great mercy of thine, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_28">28&#160;</span>As thou spakest by thy servant Moses in the day when thou didst command him to write the law before the children of Israel, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>If ye will not hear my voice, surely <a href='#FN98'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>this very great multitude shall be turned into a small number among the nations, where I will scatter them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_30">30&#160;</span>For I knew that they would not hear me, because it is a <a href='#FN99'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>stiffnecked people: but <a href='#FN100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>in the land of their captivities they shall <a href='#FN101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>remember themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_31">31&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shall know that I am the Lord their God: for <a href='#FN103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>I will give them an heart, and ears to hear: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>And they shall praise me in the land of their captivity, and think upon my name, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_33">33&#160;</span>And return from their stiff <a href='#FN105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neck, and from their wicked deeds: for they shall remember the way of their fathers, which sinned before the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_34">34&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>I will bring them again into the land which I promised with an oath unto their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and they shall be lords of it: and I will increase them, and they shall not be diminished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR2_35">35&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN107'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>I will make an everlasting covenant with them <a href='#FN108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>to be their God, and they shall be my people: and I will <a href='#FN109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>no more drive my people of Israel out of the land that I have given them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='BR3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_1">1&#160;</span>O Lord <a href='#FN110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Almighty, God of Israel, the soul in anguish the troubled spirit, crieth unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_2">2&#160;</span>Hear, O Lord, and have mercy; for thou art merciful: and have pity upon us, because we have sinned before thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>For thou endurest for ever, and we perish utterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_4">4&#160;</span>O Lord <a href='#FN112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers of the <a href='#FN113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>dead Israelites, and of their children, which have sinned before thee, and not hearkened unto the voice of thee their God: for the which cause <a href='#FN114'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>these plagues cleave unto us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_5">5&#160;</span>Remember not the iniquities of our forefathers: but think upon thy power and thy name now at this time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_6">6&#160;</span>For thou art the Lord our God, and thee, O Lord, will we praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_7">7&#160;</span>And for this cause thou hast put thy fear in our hearts, to the intent that we should call upon thy name, and praise thee in our captivity: for <a href='#FN115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>we have <a href='#FN116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>called to mind all the iniquity of our forefathers, that sinned before thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_8">8&#160;</span>Behold, we are yet this day in our captivity, where thou hast scattered us, <a href='#FN117'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>for a reproach and <a href='#FN118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>a curse, and <a href='#FN119'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to be subject to payments, according to all the iniquities of our fathers, which departed from the Lord our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_9">9&#160;</span>Hear, Israel, the commandments of life: give ear to understand wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_10">10&#160;</span>How happeneth it Israel, that thou art in thine enemies’ land, that thou art waxen old in a strange country, that thou art defiled w<a href='#FN120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>ith the dead, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_11">11&#160;</span>That <a href='#FN121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>thou art counted with them that <a href='#FN122'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>go down into the grave? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_12">12&#160;</span>Thou hast forsaken <a href='#FN123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the fountain of wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_13">13&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>if thou hadst walked in the way of God, thou shouldest have dwelled in peace for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_14">14&#160;</span>Learn where is wisdom, where is strength, where is understanding; that thou mayest know also where is length of days, and life, where is <a href='#FN125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the light of the eyes, and peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Who hath found out her place? or who hath come into her treasures? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_16">16&#160;</span>Where are the princes of the heathen become, and such as <a href='#FN127'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>ruled the beasts upon the earth; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_17">17&#160;</span>They that <a href='#FN128'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>had their pastime with the fowls of the air, and they that hoarded up silver and gold, <a href='#FN129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>wherein men trust, and made no end of their getting? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_18">18&#160;</span>For they that wrought in silver, and were so careful, and whose works are unsearchable, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_19">19&#160;</span>They <a href='#FN130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>are vanished and <a href='#FN131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>gone down to the grave, and others are come up in their steads. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_20">20&#160;</span>Young men have seen light, and dwelt upon the earth: but <a href='#FN132'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the way of knowledge have they not known, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_21">21&#160;</span>Nor understood the paths thereof, nor laid hold of it: their children were far off from that way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_22">22&#160;</span>It hath not been heard of in Chanaan, <a href='#FN133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>neither hath it been seen in <a href='#FN134'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Theman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_23">23&#160;</span>The <a href='#FN135'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Agarenes that seek wisdom upon earth, the merchants of <a href='#FN136'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Meran and of <a href='#FN137'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Theman, the <a href='#FN138'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>authors of fables, and searchers out of understanding; none of these have known the way of wisdom, or remember her paths. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_24">24&#160;</span>O Israel, how great is the house of God! and how large is the place of his possession! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_25">25&#160;</span>Great, and hath none end; high, and unmeasurable. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_26">26&#160;</span>There were the <a href='#FN139'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>giants famous from the beginning, that were <a href='#FN140'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>of so great stature, and so expert in war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_27">27&#160;</span>Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave he <a href='#FN141'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the way of knowledge unto them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_28">28&#160;</span>But they were destroyed, because they had no wisdom, and perished through their own foolishness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Who hath gone up into heaven, and taken her, and brought her down from the clouds? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Who hath gone over the sea, and found her, and will bring her <a href='#FN144'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>for pure gold? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_31">31&#160;</span>No man knoweth her way, nor thinketh of her path. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_32">32&#160;</span>But he that knoweth all things knoweth her, and hath found her out with his understanding: he that prepared the earth for evermore hath filled it with fourfooted beasts: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_33">33&#160;</span>He that sendeth forth light, and it goeth, calleth it again, and it obeyeth him with fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_34">34&#160;</span>The stars shined <a href='#FN145'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in their watches, and rejoiced: when <a href='#FN146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he calleth them, they say, Here we be; and so with cheerfulness they shewed light unto him that made them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_35">35&#160;</span>This is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of in comparison of him </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_36">36&#160;</span>He hath found out all <a href='#FN147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his <a href='#FN148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>beloved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR3_37">37&#160;</span>Afterward <a href='#FN149'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>did he shew himself upon earth, and <a href='#FN150'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>conversed with men.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='BR4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_1">1&#160;</span>This is the book of the commandments of God, and the law that endureth for ever: all they that keep it shall come to life; but such as leave it shall die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_2">2&#160;</span>Turn thee, O Jacob, and take hold of it: walk <a href='#FN151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the presence of the light thereof, <a href='#FN152'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>that thou mayest be illuminated. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_3">3&#160;</span>Give not thine honour to another, nor the things that are profitable unto thee to a strange nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_4">4&#160;</span>O Israel, happy are we: for things that are pleasing to God are made known unto us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_5">5&#160;</span>Be of good cheer, my people, the memorial of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Ye were sold to the nations, not for <span class='add'>your</span> destruction: but because ye moved God to wrath, ye were delivered unto the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_7">7&#160;</span>For ye provoked him that made you by <a href='#FN154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>sacrificing unto devils, and not to God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_8">8&#160;</span>Ye have forgotten <a href='#FN155'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the everlasting God, that brought you up; and ye have grieved Jerusalem, that nursed you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_9">9&#160;</span>For when she saw the wrath of God coming upon you, she said, Hearken, O <a href='#FN156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>ye that dwell about Sion: God hath brought upon me great mourning; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_10">10&#160;</span>For I saw <a href='#FN157'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the captivity of my sons and daughters, which <a href='#FN158'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the Everlasting brought upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_11">11&#160;</span>With joy did I nourish them; but <a href='#FN159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>sent them away with weeping and mourning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_12">12&#160;</span>Let no man rejoice over me, <a href='#FN160'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>a widow, and forsaken of many, who for the sins of my children am left desolate; because they departed from the law of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_13">13&#160;</span>They knew not his statutes, nor walked in the ways of his commandments, nor trod in the paths <a href='#FN161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of discipline in his righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_14">14&#160;</span>Let them <a href='#FN162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that dwell about Sion come, and <a href='#FN163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>remember ye the captivity of my sons and daughters, which <a href='#FN164'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the Everlasting hath brought upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_15">15&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN165'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>he hath brought a nation upon them from far, a shameless nation, and of a strange language, <a href='#FN166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>who neither reverenced old man, nor pitied child. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_16">16&#160;</span>These have carried away the dear beloved children of the widow, and left her that was alone desolate without daughters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_17">17&#160;</span>But what can I help you? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_18">18&#160;</span>For he that brought these plagues upon you will deliver you from the hands of your enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_19">19&#160;</span>Go your way, O my children, go your way: for I am left desolate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>I have put off the clothing of <a href='#FN168'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>peace, and put upon me the sackcloth of my prayer: I will cry unto <a href='#FN169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the Everlasting <a href='#FN170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN171'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in my days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_21">21&#160;</span>Be of good cheer, O my children, cry unto the Lord, and he will deliver you from the power and hand of the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_22">22&#160;</span>For my hope is in the Everlasting, that he will save you; and joy is come unto me from the Holy One, because of the mercy which shall soon come unto you from <a href='#FN172'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the Everlasting our Saviour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_23">23&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN173'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>I sent you out with mourning and weeping: but God will give you to me again with <a href='#FN174'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>joy and gladness for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_24">24&#160;</span>Like as now <a href='#FN175'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the neighbours of Sion have seen your captivity: so shall they see shortly your salvation from our God which shall come upon you with great glory, and b<a href='#FN176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>rightness of t<a href='#FN177'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>he Everlasting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_25">25&#160;</span>My children, suffer patiently the wrath that is come upon you from God: for thine enemy hath persecuted thee; but shortly thou shalt see his destruction, and shalt tread upon his neck. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My delicate ones have gone rough ways, and were taken away as a flock caught of the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_27">27&#160;</span>Be of good comfort, O my children, and cry unto God: for ye shall be remembered of him <a href='#FN179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>that brought these things upon you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_28">28&#160;</span>For as it was your mind <a href='#FN180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>kk</a>to go astray from God: so, being returned, seek him <a href='#FN181'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>ten times more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_29">29&#160;</span>For he <a href='#FN182'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>that hath brought these plagues upon you shall bring you everlasting joy with your salvation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_30">30&#160;</span>Take a good heart, O Jerusalem: for <a href='#FN183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>he that gave thee that name will comfort thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_31">31&#160;</span>Miserable are they that afflicted thee, and rejoiced at thy fall. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_32">32&#160;</span>Miserable are the cities which thy children served: miserable is she that received thy sons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_33">33&#160;</span>For as she rejoiced at thy ruin, and was glad of thy fall: <a href='#FN184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>so shall she be grieved for her own desolation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>For I will take away the rejoicing of her great multitude, and her pride shall be turned into mourning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_35">35&#160;</span>For fire shall come upon her from <a href='#FN186'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the Everlasting, long to endure; and <a href='#FN187'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>she shall be inhabited of devils for a great time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_36">36&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>O Jerusalem, look about thee toward the east, and behold the joy that cometh unto thee from God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR4_37">37&#160;</span>Lo, <a href='#FN189'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a><a href='#FN190'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>thy sons come, <a href='#FN191'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>whom thou sentest away, they come gathered together from the east to the west <a href='#FN192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>by the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the glory of God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='BR5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Put off, O Jerusalem, the garment of mourning and affliction, and put on the comeliness of the glory that cometh from God for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_2">2&#160;</span>Cast about thee <a href='#FN194'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>a double garment of the righteousness which cometh from God; and set a diadem on thine head of the glory of <a href='#FN195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the Everlasting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_3">3&#160;</span>For God will shew <a href='#FN196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>thy brightness unto every country under heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_4">4&#160;</span>For thy name shall be called of God for ever The peace of righteousness, and The glory of G<a href='#FN197'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>od’s worship. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_5">5&#160;</span>Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high, and <a href='#FN198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>look about toward the east, and behold thy children gathered from the west unto the east <a href='#FN199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>by the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the remembrance of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_6">6&#160;</span>For they departed from thee on foot, and were led away of their enemies: but <a href='#FN200'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>God bringeth them unto thee exalted with glory, as <a href='#FN201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>children of the kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_7">7&#160;</span>For God hath appointed that <a href='#FN202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>every high hill, and banks of long continuance, should be cast down, and valleys filled up, to make even the ground, that Israel may go safely in the glory of God, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_8">8&#160;</span>Moreover even the woods and <a href='#FN203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>every sweetsmelling tree shall overshadow Israel by the commandment of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR5_9">9&#160;</span>For God shall lead Israel with joy <a href='#FN204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>in the light of his glory with the mercy and righteousness that cometh from him.  </div>
<div class='ms' id='BR6_0'>The Epistle of Jeremy </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 6</div>
<div class='s'>A copy of an epistle, which Jeremy sent unto them which were to be led captives into Babylon by the king of the Babilonians, to certify them, as it was commanded him of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_1">1&#160;</span>A copy of an epistle, which Jeremy sent unto them which were to be led captives into Babylon by the king of the Babylonians, to certify them, as it was commanded him of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_2">2&#160;</span>Because of the sins which ye have committed before God, <a href='#FN205'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>ye shall be led away captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor king of the Babylonians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_3">3&#160;</span>So when ye be come unto Babylon, ye shall remain there many years, and for a long season, namely, <a href='#FN206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>seven generations: and after that I will bring you away peaceably from thence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_4">4&#160;</span>Now shall ye see in Babylon <a href='#FN207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood, <a href='#FN208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>borne upon shoulders, <a href='#FN209'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>which cause the nations to fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_5">5&#160;</span>Beware therefore that ye in no wise be like to strangers, <a href='#FN210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>neither be ye afraid of them, when ye see the multitude before them and behind them, worshipping them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_6">6&#160;</span>But say ye in your hearts, O <a href='#FN211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Lord, we must worship thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_7">7&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN212'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>mine angel is with you, and I myself caring for your souls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_8">8&#160;</span>As for their tongue, it is polished by the workman, and they themselves are <a href='#FN213'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>gilded and laid over with silver; yet are they but false, and <a href='#FN214'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>cannot speak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_9">9&#160;</span>And taking gold, as it were for a virgin that loveth to go gay, they make crowns for the heads of their gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_10">10&#160;</span>Sometimes also the priests convey from their gods gold and silver, and bestow it upon themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_11">11&#160;</span>Yea, they will give thereof to the <a href='#FN215'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>common harlots, and <a href='#FN216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>deck them as men with garments, <span class='add'>being</span> <a href='#FN217'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>gods of silver, and gods of gold, and wood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_12">12&#160;</span>Yet cannot these gods save themselves from <a href='#FN218'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>rust and moth, though they be covered with <a href='#FN219'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a><a href='#FN220'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>purple raiment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_13">13&#160;</span>They wipe their faces <a href='#FN221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>because of the dust of the temple, when there is much upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_14">14&#160;</span>And he that cannot put to death one that offendeth him holdeth a sceptre, as though he were a judge of the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_15">15&#160;</span>He hath also in his right hand a dagger and an ax: but cannot deliver himself from war and <a href='#FN222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>thieves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Whereby they are known not to be gods: <a href='#FN224'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a><a href='#FN225'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>therefore fear them not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_17">17&#160;</span>For like as a vessel that a man useth is nothing worth when it is broken; even so it is with their gods: when they be set up in the temple, their eyes be <a href='#FN226'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>full of dust through the feet of them that come in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_18">18&#160;</span>And as <a href='#FN227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the <a href='#FN228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>doors are made sure on every side upon him that offendeth the king, as being <a href='#FN229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>committed to suffer death: even so the priests make fast their temples with doors, with locks, and bars, lest their gods be spoiled with <a href='#FN230'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>robbers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_19">19&#160;</span>They light them candles, yea, more than for themselves, whereof they cannot see one. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_20">20&#160;</span>They are <a href='#FN231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>qq</a>as one of the beams of the temple, yet they say their hearts are <a href='#FN232'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gnawed upon by things creeping out of the earth; and when they eat them and their clothes, they feel it not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_21">21&#160;</span>Their faces are blacked through the smoke that cometh out of the temple. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_22">22&#160;</span>Upon their bodies and heads sit bats, swallows, and birds, and the cats also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>By this ye may know that they are no gods: <a href='#FN234'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a><a href='#FN235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>therefore fear them not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_24">24&#160;</span>Notwithstanding the gold that is about them to make them beautiful, except they <a href='#FN236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>wipe off the <a href='#FN237'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>rust, they will not shine: for neither when they were molten did they feel it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_25">25&#160;</span>The things wherein there is no breath are bought for <a href='#FN238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a most high price. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a><a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>They are borne upon shoulders, having no feet whereby they declare unto men that they be nothing worth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_27">27&#160;</span>They also that serve them are ashamed: <a href='#FN241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a><a href='#FN242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>for if they fall to the ground at any time, they cannot rise up again of themselves: neither, if one set them upright, can they move of themselves: neither, <a href='#FN243'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>if they be bowed down, can they make themselves straight: but they <a href='#FN244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>set <a href='#FN245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gifts before them a<a href='#FN246'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>s unto dead men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_28">28&#160;</span>As for the things that are sacrificed unto them, <a href='#FN247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>their priests sell and <a href='#FN248'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>abuse; <a href='#FN250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>in like manner their wives lay up part thereof in salt; but unto the poor and impotent they give nothing of it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_29">29&#160;</span>Menstruous women and <a href='#FN251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>women in childbed eat their sacrifices: <a href='#FN252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>by these things ye may know that they are no gods: <a href='#FN253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>fear them not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_30">30&#160;</span>For how can they be called gods? because women <a href='#FN254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>set meat before <a href='#FN255'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the gods of silver, gold, and wood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_31">31&#160;</span>And the priests sit in their temples, <a href='#FN256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>having their clothes rent, and <a href='#FN257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>their heads and beards shaven, and nothing upon their heads. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>They roar and cry before their gods, as men do <a href='#FN259'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>at the feast when one is dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_33">33&#160;</span>The priests also <a href='#FN260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>take off their garments, and clothe their wives and children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_34">34&#160;</span>Whether it be evil that one doeth unto them, or good, they are not able to recompense it: they can neither <a href='#FN261'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>hh</a>set up a king, nor put him down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_35">35&#160;</span>In like manner, they can neither give riches nor <a href='#FN262'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>money: <a href='#FN263'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>though a man make a vow unto them, and keep it not, they will not require it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_36">36&#160;</span>They can save no man from death, neither deliver the weak from the mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_37">37&#160;</span>They cannot restore a blind man to his sight, nor help any man in his distress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_38">38&#160;</span>They can shew no mercy to the widow, nor do good to the fatherless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_39">39&#160;</span><a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Their gods of wood, and which are <a href='#FN265'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>overlaid with gold and silver, are like the stones that be hewn out of the mountain: <a href='#FN266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>they that worship them shall be confounded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_40">40&#160;</span><a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>How should a man then think and say that they are gods, when even the Chaldeans themselves dishonour them? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_41">41&#160;</span><a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Who if they shall see one dumb that cannot speak, they <a href='#FN269'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bring him, and intreat <a href='#FN270'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Bel that he may speak, as though he were able to understand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_42">42&#160;</span>Yet they cannot understand this themselves, and leave them: for they have no <a href='#FN271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>knowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>The women also with cords about them, sitting in the ways, burn <a href='#FN273'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>bran for perfume: but if any of them, drawn by some that passeth by, lie with him, she reproacheth her fellow, that she was not thought as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_44">44&#160;</span>Whatsoever is done among them is false: <a href='#FN274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>how may it then be thought or said that they are gods? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_45">45&#160;</span><a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>They are made of carpenters and goldsmiths: they can be nothing else than the workmen will have them to be. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_46">46&#160;</span>And they themselves that made them can never continue long; how should then the things that are made of them be gods? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_47">47&#160;</span>For they left lies and reproaches to them that come after. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_48">48&#160;</span>For when there cometh any war or plague upon them, the priests consult with themselves, where they may be hidden with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_49">49&#160;</span><a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>How then cannot men perceive that they be no gods, which can neither save themselves from war, nor from plague? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_50">50&#160;</span>For seeing they be but <a href='#FN277'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>of wood, and <a href='#FN278'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>overlaid with silver and gold, it shall be known hereafter that they are false: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_51">51&#160;</span>And it shall manifestly appear to all nations and kings that they are no gods, but <a href='#FN279'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the works of men’s hands, and that there is no work of God in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_52">52&#160;</span><a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Who then may not know that they are no gods? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_53">53&#160;</span>For neither can they <a href='#FN281'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>set up a king in the land, nor <a href='#FN282'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>give rain unto men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_54">54&#160;</span>Neither <a href='#FN283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>can they judge their own cause, nor <a href='#FN284'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>redress a wrong, being unable: for they are as crows between heaven and earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_55">55&#160;</span>Whereupon when fire falleth upon the house of <a href='#FN285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>gods of wood, or <a href='#FN286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>laid over with gold or silver, their priests will flee away, and escape; but they themselves shall be burned asunder <a href='#FN287'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>like beams. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_56">56&#160;</span>Moreover <a href='#FN288'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>they cannot withstand any king or enemies: <a href='#FN289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>how can it then be thought or said that they be gods? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_57">57&#160;</span>Neither are those <a href='#FN290'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>gods of wood, and <a href='#FN291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>laid over with silver or gold, able to escape either from thieves or <a href='#FN292'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>robbers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_58">58&#160;</span>Whose gold, and silver, and garments wherewith they are clothed, they that are strong take, and go away withal: <a href='#FN293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>neither are they able to help themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_59">59&#160;</span>Therefore it is better to be a king that sheweth his power, or else <a href='#FN294'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>a profitable vessel in an house, which the owner shall have use of, than such false gods; or to be a door in an house, to keep such things therein, than such false gods. or a pillar of wood in a a palace, than such false gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_60">60&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>sun, moon, and stars, being bright and sent to do their offices, are obedient. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_61">61&#160;</span>In like manner the lightning when it breaketh forth is easy to be seen; and <a href='#FN296'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>after the same manner the wind bloweth in every country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_62">62&#160;</span>And when God commandeth the clouds to go over the whole <a href='#FN298'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>world, they do as they are bidden. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_63">63&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN299'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the fire sent from above to consume hills and woods doeth as it is commanded: but these are like unto them neither in shew nor power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_64">64&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN300'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>it is neither to be supposed nor said that they are gods, seeing, they are able neither<a href='#FN301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a> to judge causes, nor<a href='#FN302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a> to do good unto men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_65">65&#160;</span><a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Knowing therefore that they are no gods, <a href='#FN304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>fear them not, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_66">66&#160;</span>For they can neither curse nor bless kings: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_67">67&#160;</span>Neither can they shew signs in the heavens among the heathen, <a href='#FN305'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>nor shine as the sun, nor give light as the moon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_68">68&#160;</span>The beasts are better than they: for they can get under a cover and help themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_69">69&#160;</span><a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>It is then by no means manifest unto us that they are gods: <a href='#FN307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>therefore fear them not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_70">70&#160;</span>For as a scarecrow in <a href='#FN308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a garden of cucumbers keepeth nothing: so are their <a href='#FN309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>gods of wood, and <a href='#FN310'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>laid over with silver and gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_71">71&#160;</span>And likewise their <a href='#FN311'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>gods of wood, and <a href='#FN312'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>laid over with silver and gold, are like to a white thorn in an orchard, that every bird sitteth upon; as also to <a href='#FN313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>a dead body, that is cast into the dark. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_72">72&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>ye shall know them to be no gods by the <a href='#FN315'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bright purple that rotteth upon them: and <a href='#FN316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>they themselves afterward shall be eaten, and shall be a reproach in the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="BR6_73">73&#160;</span>Better therefore is the just man that hath none idols: for he shall be far from reproach. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_1'>Josh. 1. 1</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_1'>1 Macc. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_12'>Jer. 32. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_59'>Jer. 51. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_4'>4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_9'>9</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_12'>2 Kin. 24. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_27'>25. 27</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_10'>2 Chr. 36. 10</a> with <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_8'>2 Kin. 25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_4'>4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_9'>9</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_12'>2 Kin. 24. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_27'>25. 27</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_10'>2 Chr. 36. 10</a> with <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_8'>2 Kin. 25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_12'>Jer. 32. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_9'>ver. 9</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_8'>2 Chr. 36. 8</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_9'>9</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_59'>Jer. 51. 59–64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Joacim</span>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_34'>2 Kin. 23. 34</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_13'>Jer. 6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>and vowed vows</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C116_2'>1 Cor. 16. 2</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C28_3'>2 Cor. 8. 3</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_26'>Rom. 15. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Joacim</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_13'>1 Chr. 6. 13</a> (Gk.). <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_2'>Susanna 2</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_12'>1 Chr. 6. 12</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_13'>2 Kin. 24. 13</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_10'>2 Chr. 36. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET8_9'>Esther 8. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_3'>Dan. 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_17'>2 Kin. 24. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_4'>4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_9'>9</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_12'>2 Kin. 24. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_27'>25. 27</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_10'>2 Chr. 36. 10</a> with <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_8'>2 Kin. 25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_9'>ver. 9</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_8'>2 Chr. 36. 8</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_9'>9</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_59'>Jer. 51. 59–64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>prisoners</span>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_1'>Acts 27. 1</a>, <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_42'>42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_10"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_18'>Ex. 29. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_10"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_14'>Ex. 29. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_8'>Ecclus. 50. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. corruptly for <span class='add'>mincha</span>, [that is,] <span class='add'>a meat offering</span>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_26'>Jer. 17. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_5'>41. 5</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_46'>Dan. 2. 46</a> in the Gk. Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_1'>Lev. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_11"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER6_10'>Ezra 6. 10</a>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M17_33'>1 Macc. 7. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_11"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_1'>Dan. 5. 1</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_2'>2</a>, &amp;c. &amp; <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_1'>7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN8_1'>8. 1</a>. in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_11"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_15'>Ecclus. 45. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_12"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK31_6'>Ezek. 31. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_12'>Dan. 4. 12</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_12"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_1'>Dan. 5. 1</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_2'>2</a>, &amp;c. &amp; <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_1'>7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN8_1'>8. 1</a>. in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_12"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_60'>1 Macc. 10. 60</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_24'>11. 24</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_14'>ch. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_14"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_1'>ver. 1</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_15"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_7'>Dan. 9. 7</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_6'>ch. 2. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_32'>Neh. 9. 32–37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_15"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R232_21'>2 Chr. 32. 21</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_6'>ch. 2. 6</a> (Gk.)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_15'>ver. 15</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_6'>ch. 2. 6</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_11'>11</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_16"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_17"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_5'>Dan. 9. 5</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_18"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_5'>Dan. 9. 5</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_10'>Dan. 9. 10</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_10'>ch. 2. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_10'>Dan. 9. 10</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_10'>ch. 2. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_20"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_4'>ch. 3. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_20"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>Deut. 28. 15</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_8'>ch. 3. 8</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_7'>ch. 2. 7</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_11'>Dan. 9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_20"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_8'>Ecclus. 46. 8</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_8'>Ex. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_20"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_15'>ver. 15</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_6'>ch. 2. 6</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_11'>11</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_21"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_10'>Dan. 9. 10</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_10'>ch. 2. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_21"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_15'>2 Chr. 36. 15–17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR1_22"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_6'>2 Esdr. 1. 6</a> (Lat.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_12'>Dan. 9. 12</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_12'>Dan. 9. 12</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_20'>Lam. 2. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_10'>4. 10</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_53'>Deut. 28. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_2'>2 Kings 24. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_28'>Isai. 43. 28</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_8'>ch. 3. 8</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_23'>ver. 23</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_38'>Jer. 25. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR44_6'>44. 6</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR44_22'>22</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>were beneath, and not above</span>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_43'>Deut. 28. 43</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_44'>44</a>. See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_92'>1 Esdr. 8. 92</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_15'>ch. 1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_6"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_26'>26</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>ch. 1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_7"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_12'>Dan. 9. 12</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>ch. 1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_13'>Dan. 9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_14'>Dan. 9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_15'>Ezra 9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_14'>Dan. 9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_10'>Dan. 9. 10</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_18'>ch. 1. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_10'>Dan. 9. 10</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_18'>ch. 1. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_15'>Dan. 9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_10'>Neh. 9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_26'>26</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>ch. 1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_15'>Dan. 9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_6'>Ps. 106. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_16'>Dan. 9. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR42_2'>Jer. 42. 2</a>. So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_62'>Deut. 28. 62</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_14'>Song 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_17'>Dan. 9. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_46'>Ps. 106. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_19'>2 Kin. 19. 19</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS37_20'>Isai. 37. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr, <span class='add'>thy name is called upon Israel</span>. So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_18'>Dan. 9. 18</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_26'>ver. 26</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_15"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_19'>Dan. 9. 19</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_12'>Ecclus. 36. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_16"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_15'>Deut. 26. 15</a>. So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_15'>Isai. 63. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_16"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_18'>Dan. 9. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_17"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS6_5'>Ps. 6. 5</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_27'>Ecclus. 17. 27</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>spirit</span>, or, <span class='add'>life</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_18"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_18'>Dan. 9. 18</a>. Comp. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_16'>Song 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_19"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_18'>Dan. 9. 18</a>. Comp. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_16'>Song 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_20"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_6'>Dan. 9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_23"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_34'>Jer. 7. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_23"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_23'>ch. 4. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_23"><span class="notemark">ee</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_23'>ch. 4. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_23"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_24"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_24"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_1'>Jer. 8. 1</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_25"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_1'>Jer. 8. 1</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_25"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR36_30'>Jer. 36. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_25"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR27_13'>Jer. 27. 13</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_26"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_14'>Jer. 7. 14</a>. See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_10'>Jer. 7. 10</a> marg. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_15'>ver. 15</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_26"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_27"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_19'>Wisd. 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_29"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_14'>Lev. 26. 14</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>Deut. 28. 15</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_62'>62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>this great swarm</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_30"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_51'>Acts 7. 51</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_9'>Ex. 32. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_30"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_39'>Lev. 26. 39–42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>come to themselves</span>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_7'>ch. 3. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_31"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_5'>Ex. 7. 5</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_16'>Ps. 9. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_31"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR24_7'>Jer. 24. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_32"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_39'>Lev. 26. 39–42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>back</span>. Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_27'>Ex. 23. 27</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_34"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_15'>Jer. 16. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_35"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_31'>Jer. 31. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_35"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR24_7'>Jer. 24. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR2_35"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.35</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_22'>Lam. 4. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_26'>Ps. 102. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_4"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EPH.xhtml#EP2_1'>Eph. 2. 1</a>, <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP2_5'>5</a>. or comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>ch. 1. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_1'>Deut. 30. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_30'>ch. 2. 30</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_4'>ch. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>ch. 1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_44'>Deut. 28. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_10"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EPH.xhtml#EP2_1'>Eph. 2. 1</a>, <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP2_5'>5</a>. or comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS28_1'>Ps. 28. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Supplied from <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_5'>Ecclus. 1. 5</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_47'>2 Esdr. 14. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS81_13'>Ps. 81. 13</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS81_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_30'>Prov. 15. 30</a>. So <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB10_5'>Toibt 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_12'>Job 28. 12</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_7'>Judith 11. 7</a>. See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR27_6'>Jer. 27. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK31_6'>Ezek. 31. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_24'>Mark 10. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_19"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_13'>2 Macc. 5. 13</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_19"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Supplied from <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_20"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_36'>36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR49_7'>Jer. 49. 7</a>. So <a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_8'>Obad. 8</a>, <a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_22"><span class="notemark">v</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_45'>1 Chr. 1. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_23"><span class="notemark">w</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_10'>1 Chr. 5. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_30'>1 Kin. 4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_36'>Gen. 37. 36</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_23"><span class="notemark">v</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_45'>1 Chr. 1. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>expounders</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_26"><span class="notemark">y</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_7'>Ecclus. 16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_26"><span class="notemark">z</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_4'>Gen. 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_27"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_36'>36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Cited generally from <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_12'>Deut. 30. 12</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_13'>13</a>. Cited also <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_6'>Rom. 10. 6</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_30"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Cited generally from <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_12'>Deut. 30. 12</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_13'>13</a>. Cited also <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_6'>Rom. 10. 6</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_30"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_15'>Job 28. 15–19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_34"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_10'>Ecclus. 43. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_34"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_4'>Ps. 147. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_36"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_36'>36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_36"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>Ecclus. 45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_37"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_31'>Prov. 8. 31</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_8'>Ecclus. 24. 8</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_14'>John 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR3_37"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_31'>Prov. 8. 31</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_8'>Ecclus. 24. 8</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_14'>John 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>to the shining before the light thereof</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_11'>Ecclus. 25. 11</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>ver. 24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_3'>ch. 5. 3</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_6"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_25'>Judith 7. 25</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_30'>Deut. 32. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Cited from <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_17'>Deut. 32. 17</a>. Cited also <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_20'>1 Cor. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_8"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_10"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_11'>ver. 11</a> Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_12"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_8'>Isai. 47. 8</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of his discipline in righteousness</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_14"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_14"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_15"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_49'>Deut. 28. 49</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_50'>50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_15"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_49'>Deut. 28. 49</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_50'>50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_20"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_2'>Esther 14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>prosperity</span>. Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_11'>Esth. 2. 11</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in the time of mine affliction</span>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS137_7'>Ps. 137. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_20"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS116_0'>Ps. 116</a>. (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_22"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_23"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_11'>ver. 11</a> Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_23"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_23'>ch. 2. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_24"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_11'>Ecclus. 25. 11</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>ver. 24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_3'>ch. 5. 3</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_24"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>My darlings</span>. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_31'>Susanna 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_27"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_28"><span class="notemark">kk</span> 4.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_13'>Ecclus. 51. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_28"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB19_3'>Job 19. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_29"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_30"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_1'>Isai. 43. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_4'>45. 4</a> Or comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_4'>ch. 5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_33"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_19'>Isai. 13. 19–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_34"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_19'>Isai. 13. 19–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_35"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_10'>ver. 10</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_14'>14</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_22'>22</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_24'>24</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_35"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_19'>Isai. 13. 19–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_36"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_4'>Isai. 60. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_37"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_4'>Isai. 60. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_37"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.37</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_5'>Tobit 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_37"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.37</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_11'>ver. 11</a> Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_37'>ver. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR4_37"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_4'>Isai. 60. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_1'>Esther 15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_10'>Isai. 61. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_35'>ch. 4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_2'>ch. 4. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TI.xhtml#T12_10'>1 Tim. 2. 10</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_30'>ch. 4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_36'>ch. 4. 36</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_37'>37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_36'>ch. 4. 36</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_37'>37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_20'>Isai. 66. 20</a>. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_2'>1 Esdr. 5. 2</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_5'>Tobit 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_38'>Matt. 13. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_4'>Isai. 40. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_19'>Isai. 41. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR5_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_2'>ch. 4. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_12'>2 Kin. 24. 12–16</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_11'>25. 11</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_10'>2 Chr. 36. 10</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_20'>20</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_9'>Jer. 25. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_21'>2 Chr. 36. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_30'>ver. 30</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_39'>39</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_50'>50</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_55'>55</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_57'>57</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_70'>70</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_71'>71</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_4'>Ps. 115. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_15'>135. 15</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_10'>Wisd. 13. 10</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_2'>2 Macc. 2. 2</a>. So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_8'>Isai. 44. 8–10</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_5'>46. 5</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_6'>6</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_8'>Wisd. 14. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_26'>ver. 26</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_7'>Isai. 46. 7</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_5'>Jer. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_4"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_5"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_17'>2 Macc. 5. 17</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M25_20'>20</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_14'>6. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_22'>15. 22</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_24'>Ecclus. 34. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_20'>Ex. 23. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_39'>ver. 39</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_50'>50</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_55'>55</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_57'>57</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_70'>70</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_71'>71</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_22'>Isai. 30. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_7'>Ps. 115. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_16'>135. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>which prostitute themselves openly</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_9'>Jer. 10. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_11"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_30'>ver. 30</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_39'>39</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_50'>50</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_55'>55</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_57'>57</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_70'>70</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_71'>71</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_4'>Ps. 115. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_15'>135. 15</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_10'>Wisd. 13. 10</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_2'>2 Macc. 2. 2</a>. So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_8'>Isai. 44. 8–10</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_5'>46. 5</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_6'>6</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_8'>Wisd. 14. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_12"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_24'>ver. 24</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_2'>James 5. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_9'>Jer. 10. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_72'>ver. 72</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_18'>ver. 18</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_57'>57</a> (Gk.). <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_26'>Ecclus. 36. 26</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_40'>John 18. 40</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_23'>ver. 23</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_29'>29</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_65'>65</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_69'>69</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_72'>72</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_23'>ver. 23</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_29'>29</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_65'>65</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_69'>69</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_72'>72</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_17"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR37_16'>Jer. 37. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR38_6'>38. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>courts</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_46'>1 Macc. 11. 46</a>. See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV11_2'>Rev. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_45'>Susanna 45</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC12_19'>Acts 12. 19</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_18'>ver. 18</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_57'>57</a> (Gk.). <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_26'>Ecclus. 36. 26</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_40'>John 18. 40</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_20"><span class="notemark">qq</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_55'>ver. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>licked</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_23"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_23'>ver. 23</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_29'>29</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_65'>65</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_69'>69</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_72'>72</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_23"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_23'>ver. 23</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_29'>29</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_65'>65</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_69'>69</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_72'>72</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_24"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_11'>Ecclus. 12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_24"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_24'>ver. 24</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_2'>James 5. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>any price</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_26'>ver. 26</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_7'>Isai. 46. 7</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_5'>Jer. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_26"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_15'>Wisd. 13. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_27"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_15'>Wisd. 13. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_27"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S15_3'>1 Sam. 5. 3</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S15_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_27"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_1'>Isai. 46. 1</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_27"><span class="notemark">v</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>offerings</span>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_4'>Luke 21. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_27"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_32'>ver. 32</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_71'>71</a>. Or see <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_15'>Jer. 18. 15</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_28"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_13'>Bel and Drag. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>spend</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_31'>1 Cor. 7. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='1CO.xhtml#C19_18'>9. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_33'>ver. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV12_4'>Lev. 12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_29"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_29"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_30"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_30"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_31"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV21_4'>Lev. 21. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV21_5'>Lev. 21. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_32"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_26'>1 Kin. 18. 26</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_32"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_17'>Tobit 4. 17</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_33"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_28'>ver. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_34"><span class="notemark">hh</span> 6.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_52'>ver. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_35"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_8'>Mark 6. 8</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_35"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_29'>Wisd. 14. 29</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_39"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_39"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.39</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_39"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.39</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_29'>Isai. 1. 29</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_40"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.40</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_56'>56</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_64'>64</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_49'>49</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_52'>52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_41"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_18'>Wisd. 13. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>bid</span> him <span class='add'>call upon Bel</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_41"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_3'>Bel and Drag. 3</a>, &amp;c. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_1'>Isai. 46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sense</span>. See <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP1_9'>Phil. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_43"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_29'>Lev. 19. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_43"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_18'>Jer. 7. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_44"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.44</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_56'>56</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_64'>64</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_49'>49</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_52'>52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_45"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_19'>Isai. 40. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_49"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.49</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_56'>56</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_64'>64</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_49'>49</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_52'>52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_50"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_50"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.50</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_51"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.51</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_4'>Ps. 115. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_15'>135. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_52"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.52</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_44'>ver. 44</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_56'>56</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_64'>64</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_49'>49</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_52'>52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_53"><span class="notemark">v</span> 6.53</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_34'>ver. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_53"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.53</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_24'>Jer. 5. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_54"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.54</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_64'>ver. 64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_54"><span class="notemark">y</span> 6.54</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_36'>ver. 36</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_38'>38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_55"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.55</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_55"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.55</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_55"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.55</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_56"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.56</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_15'>ver. 15</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_58'>58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_56"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.56</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_57"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_57"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_57"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.57</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_15'>ver. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_58"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.58</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_15'>ver. 15</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_58'>58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_59"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.59</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_11'>Wisd. 13. 11</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_21'>2 Tim. 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_60"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.60</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_60'>ver. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_61"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the same wind</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_61"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_8'>Ps. 148. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_62"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.62</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_2'>Esther 13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_63"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_8'>Ps. 148. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_64"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.64</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_40'>ver. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_64"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.64</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_54'>ver. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_64"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.64</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_36'>ver. 36–38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_65"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.65</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_65"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.65</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_67"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.67</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_60'>ver. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_69"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.69</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_69"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.69</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_70"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.70</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_8'>Isai. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_70"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.70</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_70"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.70</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_71"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.71</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_71"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.71</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_71"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.71</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_72"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.72</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_72"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.72</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="notemark">pq</span> <span class='add'>purple and</span> <span class="notemark">p</span> <span class='add'>brightness</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#BR6_72"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.72</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

