<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Daniel 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Daniel</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_0'>12</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='DN0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Daniel  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="DN1_1">1&#160;</span> In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_2">2&#160;</span> And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure house of his god. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN1_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring <span class='add'>certain</span> of the children of Israel, and of the king’s seed, and of the princes;
<span class="verse" id="DN1_4">4&#160;</span> Children in whom <span class='add'>was</span> no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as <span class='add'>had</span> ability in them to stand in the king’s palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_5">5&#160;</span> And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king’s meat, and of <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_6">6&#160;</span> Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:
<span class="verse" id="DN1_7">7&#160;</span> Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto Daniel <span class='add'>the name</span> of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abed-nego. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN1_8">8&#160;</span>¶ But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king’s meat, nor with the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_9">9&#160;</span> Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_10">10&#160;</span> And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see your faces <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>worse liking than the children which <span class='add'>are</span> of your <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sort? then shall ye make <span class='add'>me</span> endanger my head to the king.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_11">11&#160;</span> Then said Daniel to <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
<span class="verse" id="DN1_12">12&#160;</span> Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days; and let them give <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>us <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pulse <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to eat, and water to drink.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_13">13&#160;</span> Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king’s meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_14">14&#160;</span> So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_15">15&#160;</span> And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king’s meat.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_16">16&#160;</span> Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN1_17">17&#160;</span>¶ As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_18">18&#160;</span> Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_19">19&#160;</span> And the king communed with them; and among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stood they before the king.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_20">20&#160;</span> And in all matters of <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wisdom <span class='add'>and</span> understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians <span class='add'>and</span> astrologers that <span class='add'>were</span> in all his realm.
<span class="verse" id="DN1_21">21&#160;</span> And Daniel continued <span class='add'>even</span> unto the first year of king Cyrus.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_1">1&#160;</span> And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep brake from him.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_2">2&#160;</span> Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the king his dreams. So they came and stood before the king.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_3">3&#160;</span> And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the dream.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_4">4&#160;</span> Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_5">5&#160;</span> The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye will not make known unto me the dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shall be <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_6">6&#160;</span> But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shall receive of me gifts and <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_7">7&#160;</span> They answered again and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream, and we will shew the interpretation of it.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_8">8&#160;</span> The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_9">9&#160;</span> But if ye will not make known unto me the dream, <span class='add'>there is but</span> one decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak before me, till the time be changed: therefore tell me the dream, and I shall know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king’s matter: therefore <span class='add'>there is</span> no king, lord, nor ruler, <span class='add'>that</span> asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_11">11&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>it is</span> a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_12">12&#160;</span> For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_13">13&#160;</span> And the decree went forth that the wise <span class='add'>men</span> should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then Daniel <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>captain of the king’s guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon:
<span class="verse" id="DN2_15">15&#160;</span> He answered and said to Arioch the king’s captain, Why <span class='add'>is</span> the decree <span class='add'>so</span> hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_16">16&#160;</span> Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_17">17&#160;</span> Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:
<span class="verse" id="DN2_18">18&#160;</span> That they would desire mercies <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of the God of heaven concerning this secret; <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that Daniel and his fellows should not perish with the rest of the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_20">20&#160;</span> Daniel answered and said, <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his:
<span class="verse" id="DN2_21">21&#160;</span> And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and setteth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding:
<span class="verse" id="DN2_22">22&#160;</span> He revealeth the deep and secret things: he knoweth what <span class='add'>is</span> in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_23">23&#160;</span> I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast <span class='add'>now</span> made known unto us the king’s matter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to destroy the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him; Destroy not the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I will shew unto the king the interpretation.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_25">25&#160;</span> Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said thus unto him, <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I have found a man of the <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>captives of Judah, that will make known unto the king the interpretation.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_26">26&#160;</span> The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation thereof?
<span class="verse" id="DN2_27">27&#160;</span> Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded cannot the wise <span class='add'>men</span>, the astrologers, the magicians, the soothsayers, shew unto the king;
<span class="verse" id="DN2_28">28&#160;</span> But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these;
<span class="verse" id="DN2_29">29&#160;</span> As for thee, O king, thy thoughts <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>came <span class='add'>into thy mind</span> upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_30">30&#160;</span> But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for <span class='add'>any</span> wisdom that I have more than any living, but for <span class='add'>their</span> sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Thou, O king, <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightness <span class='add'>was</span> excellent, stood before thee; and the form thereof <span class='add'>was</span> terrible.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_32">32&#160;</span> This image’s head <span class='add'>was</span> of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thighs of brass,
<span class="verse" id="DN2_33">33&#160;</span> His legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_34">34&#160;</span> Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>without hands, which smote the image upon his feet <span class='add'>that were</span> of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_35">35&#160;</span> Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshingfloors; and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_36">36&#160;</span>¶ This <span class='add'>is</span> the dream; and we will tell the interpretation thereof before the king.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_37">37&#160;</span> Thou, O king, <span class='add'>art</span> a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_38">38&#160;</span> And wheresoever the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou <span class='add'>art</span> this head of gold.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_39">39&#160;</span> And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_40">40&#160;</span> And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all <span class='add'>things:</span> and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_41">41&#160;</span> And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters’ clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_42">42&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as</span> the toes of the feet <span class='add'>were</span> part of iron, and part of clay, <span class='add'>so</span> the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>broken.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_43">43&#160;</span> And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_44">44&#160;</span> And in <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which shall never be destroyed: and the <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>kingdom shall not be left to other people, <span class='add'>but</span> it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_45">45&#160;</span> Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shall come to pass <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hereafter: and the dream <span class='add'>is</span> certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN2_46">46&#160;</span>¶ Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshipped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odours unto him.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_47">47&#160;</span> The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth <span class='add'>it is</span>, that your God <span class='add'>is</span> a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldest reveal this secret.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_48">48&#160;</span> Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>chief of the governors over all the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="DN2_49">49&#160;</span> Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel <span class='add'>sat</span> in the gate of the king.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN3_1">1&#160;</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height <span class='add'>was</span> threescore cubits, <span class='add'>and</span> the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_2">2&#160;</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_3">3&#160;</span> Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_4">4&#160;</span> Then an herald cried <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>aloud, To you <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,
<span class="verse" id="DN3_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up:
<span class="verse" id="DN3_6">6&#160;</span> And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore at that time, when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell down <span class='add'>and</span> worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_9">9&#160;</span> They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_10">10&#160;</span> Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the golden image:
<span class="verse" id="DN3_11">11&#160;</span> And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, <span class='add'>that</span> he should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_12">12&#160;</span> There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego; these men, O king, <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have not regarded thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN3_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then Nebuchadnezzar in <span class='add'>his</span> rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Then they brought these men before the king.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_14">14&#160;</span> Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, <span class='add'>Is it</span> <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?
<span class="verse" id="DN3_15">15&#160;</span> Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made; <span class='add'>well:</span> but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>burning fiery furnace; and who <span class='add'>is</span> that God that shall deliver you out of my hands?
<span class="verse" id="DN3_16">16&#160;</span> Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we <span class='add'>are</span> not careful to answer thee in this matter.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_17">17&#160;</span> If it be <span class='add'>so</span>, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver <span class='add'>us</span> out of thine hand, O king.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_18">18&#160;</span> But if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the golden image which thou hast set up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN3_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Then was Nebuchadnezzar <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego: <span class='add'>therefore</span> he spake, and commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_20">20&#160;</span> And he commanded the <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>most mighty men that <span class='add'>were</span> in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, <span class='add'>and</span> to cast <span class='add'>them</span> into the burning fiery furnace.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_21">21&#160;</span> Then these men were bound in their <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>coats, their hosen, and their <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hats, and their <span class='add'>other</span> garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore because the king’s <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>flame of the fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_23">23&#160;</span> And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_24">24&#160;</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, <span class='add'>and</span> spake, and said unto his <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, O king.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_25">25&#160;</span> He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN3_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mouth of the burning fiery furnace, <span class='add'>and</span> spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come <span class='add'>hither</span>. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, came forth of the midst of the fire.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_27">27&#160;</span> And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king’s counsellors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN3_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> Nebuchadnezzar spake, and said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king’s word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_29">29&#160;</span> Therefore <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I make a decree, That every people, nation, and language, which speak <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort.
<span class="verse" id="DN3_30">30&#160;</span> Then the king <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, in the province of Babylon.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN4_1">1&#160;</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> I thought it good to shew the signs and wonders that the high God hath wrought toward me.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_3">3&#160;</span> How great <span class='add'>are</span> his signs! and how mighty <span class='add'>are</span> his wonders! his kingdom <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion <span class='add'>is</span> from generation to generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my palace:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_5">5&#160;</span> I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore made I a decree to bring in all the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_7">7&#160;</span> Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN4_8">8&#160;</span>¶ But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom <span class='add'>is</span> the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, <span class='add'>saying</span>,
<span class="verse" id="DN4_9">9&#160;</span> O Belteshazzar, <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods <span class='add'>is</span> in thee, and no secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_10">10&#160;</span>Thus <span class='add'>were</span> the visions of mine head in my bed; <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I saw, and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof <span class='add'>was</span> great.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_11">11&#160;</span> The tree grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_12">12&#160;</span> The leaves thereof <span class='add'>were</span> fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it <span class='add'>was</span> meat for all: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_13">13&#160;</span> I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven;
<span class="verse" id="DN4_14">14&#160;</span> He cried <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_15">15&#160;</span> Nevertheless leave the stump of his roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and <span class='add'>let</span> his portion <span class='add'>be</span> with the beasts in the grass of the earth:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_16">16&#160;</span> Let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a beast’s heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over him.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_17">17&#160;</span> This matter <span class='add'>is</span> by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the basest of men.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_18">18&#160;</span> This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as all the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou <span class='add'>art</span> able; for the spirit of the holy gods <span class='add'>is</span> in thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN4_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Then Daniel, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, the dream <span class='add'>be</span> to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_20">20&#160;</span> The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the earth;
<span class="verse" id="DN4_21">21&#160;</span> Whose leaves <span class='add'>were</span> fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it <span class='add'>was</span> meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_22">22&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>is</span> thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_23">23&#160;</span> And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and <span class='add'>let</span> his portion <span class='add'>be</span> with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;
<span class="verse" id="DN4_24">24&#160;</span> This <span class='add'>is</span> the interpretation, O king, and this <span class='add'>is</span> the decree of the most High, which is come upon my lord the king:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_25">25&#160;</span> That they shall <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_26">26&#160;</span> And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_27">27&#160;</span> Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a lengthening of thy tranquillity.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN4_28">28&#160;</span>¶ All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_29">29&#160;</span> At the end of twelve months he walked <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_30">30&#160;</span> The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?
<span class="verse" id="DN4_31">31&#160;</span> While the word <span class='add'>was</span> in the king’s mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, <span class='add'>saying</span>, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_32">32&#160;</span> And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling <span class='add'>shall be</span> with the beasts of the field: they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_33">33&#160;</span> The same hour was the thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles’ <span class='add'>feathers</span>, and his nails like birds’ <span class='add'>claws</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN4_34">34&#160;</span> And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom <span class='add'>is</span> from generation to generation:
<span class="verse" id="DN4_35">35&#160;</span> And all the inhabitants of the earth <span class='add'>are</span> reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and <span class='add'>among</span> the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>What doest thou?
<span class="verse" id="DN4_36">36&#160;</span> At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me.
<span class="verse" id="DN4_37">37&#160;</span> Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, all whose works <span class='add'>are</span> truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN5_1">1&#160;</span> Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_2">2&#160;</span> Belshazzar, whiles he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father Nebuchadnezzar had <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taken out of the temple which <span class='add'>was</span> in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_3">3&#160;</span> Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which <span class='add'>was</span> at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_4">4&#160;</span> They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN5_5">5&#160;</span>¶ In the same hour came forth fingers of a man’s hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the wall of the king’s palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_6">6&#160;</span> Then the king’s <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>countenance <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_7">7&#160;</span> The king cried <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. <span class='add'>And</span> the king spake, and said to the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of Babylon, Whosoever shall read this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shall be clothed with <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scarlet, and <span class='add'>have</span> a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_8">8&#160;</span> Then came in all the king’s wise <span class='add'>men:</span> but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_9">9&#160;</span> Then was king Belshazzar greatly troubled, and his <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>countenance was changed in him, and his lords were astonied.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN5_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Now</span> the queen, by reason of the words of the king and his lords, came into the banquet house: <span class='add'>and</span> the queen spake and said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed:
<span class="verse" id="DN5_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom <span class='add'>is</span> the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>father, the king, <span class='add'>I say</span>, thy father, made <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, <span class='add'>and</span> soothsayers;
<span class="verse" id="DN5_12">12&#160;</span> Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dissolving of <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will shew the interpretation.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_13">13&#160;</span> Then was Daniel brought in before the king. <span class='add'>And</span> the king spake and said unto Daniel, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou that Daniel, which <span class='add'>art</span> of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>father brought out of Jewry?
<span class="verse" id="DN5_14">14&#160;</span> I have even heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods <span class='add'>is</span> in thee, and <span class='add'>that</span> light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in thee.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_15">15&#160;</span> And now the wise <span class='add'>men</span>, the astrologers, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of the thing:
<span class="verse" id="DN5_16">16&#160;</span> And I have heard of thee, that thou canst <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and <span class='add'>have</span> a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN5_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rewards to another; yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_18">18&#160;</span> O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour:
<span class="verse" id="DN5_19">19&#160;</span> And for the majesty that he gave him, all people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_20">20&#160;</span> But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in pride, he was <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him:
<span class="verse" id="DN5_21">21&#160;</span> And he was <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>driven from the sons of men; and <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling <span class='add'>was</span> with the wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and <span class='add'>that</span> he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_22">22&#160;</span> And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest all this;
<span class="verse" id="DN5_23">23&#160;</span> But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath <span class='add'>is</span>, and whose <span class='add'>are</span> all thy ways, hast thou not glorified:
<span class="verse" id="DN5_24">24&#160;</span> Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was written. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN5_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is</span> the writing that was written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_26">26&#160;</span> This <span class='add'>is</span> the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_27">27&#160;</span> TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_28">28&#160;</span> PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_29">29&#160;</span> Then commanded Belshazzar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and <span class='add'>put</span> a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN5_30">30&#160;</span>¶ In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain.
<span class="verse" id="DN5_31">31&#160;</span> And Darius the Median took the kingdom, <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>being</span> <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>about threescore and two years old.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_1">1&#160;</span> It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom;
<span class="verse" id="DN6_2">2&#160;</span> And over these three presidents; of whom Daniel <span class='add'>was</span> first: that the princes might give accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_3">3&#160;</span> Then this Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit <span class='add'>was</span> in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he <span class='add'>was</span> faithful, neither was there any error or fault found in him.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_5">5&#160;</span> Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find <span class='add'>it</span> against him concerning the law of his God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_6">6&#160;</span> Then these presidents and princes <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>assembled together to the king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_7">7&#160;</span> All the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_8">8&#160;</span> Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>law of the Medes and Persians, which <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>altereth not.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_9">9&#160;</span> Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his chamber <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_11">11&#160;</span> Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_12">12&#160;</span> Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the king’s decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that every man that shall ask <span class='add'>a petition</span> of any God or man within thirty days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing <span class='add'>is</span> true, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_13">13&#160;</span> Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which <span class='add'>is</span> of the <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three times a day.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_14">14&#160;</span> Then the king, when he heard <span class='add'>these</span> words, was sore displeased with himself, and set <span class='add'>his</span> heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured till the going down of the sun to deliver him.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_15">15&#160;</span> Then these men assembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians <span class='add'>is</span>, That no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_16">16&#160;</span> Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast <span class='add'>him</span> into the den of lions. <span class='add'>Now</span> the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_17">17&#160;</span> And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting: neither were <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep went from him.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_19">19&#160;</span> Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_20">20&#160;</span> And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: <span class='add'>and</span> the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
<span class="verse" id="DN6_21">21&#160;</span> Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_22">22&#160;</span> My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_23">23&#160;</span> Then was the king exceeding glad for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the king commanded, and they brought those men which had accused Daniel, and they cast <span class='add'>them</span> into the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever they came at the bottom of the den. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN6_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Then king Darius wrote unto all people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_26">26&#160;</span> I make a decree, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he <span class='add'>is</span> the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom <span class='add'>that</span> which shall not be <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>destroyed, and his dominion <span class='add'>shall be even</span> unto the end.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_27">27&#160;</span> He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>power of the lions.
<span class="verse" id="DN6_28">28&#160;</span> So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Cyrus the Persian.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN7_1">1&#160;</span> In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon Daniel <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the dream, <span class='add'>and</span> told the sum of the <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>matters.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_2">2&#160;</span> Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_3">3&#160;</span> And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_4">4&#160;</span> The first <span class='add'>was</span> like a lion, and had eagle’s wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a man’s heart was given to it.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_5">5&#160;</span> And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>it raised up itself on one side, and <span class='add'>it had</span> three ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_6">6&#160;</span> After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads; and dominion was given to it.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_7">7&#160;</span> After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it: and it <span class='add'>was</span> diverse from all the beasts that <span class='add'>were</span> before it; and it had ten horns.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_8">8&#160;</span> I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among them another little horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots: and, behold, in this horn <span class='add'>were</span> eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN7_9">9&#160;</span>¶ I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment <span class='add'>was</span> white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne <span class='add'>was like</span> the fiery flame, <span class='add'>and</span> his wheels <span class='add'>as</span> burning fire.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_10">10&#160;</span> A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>books were opened.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_11">11&#160;</span> I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spake: I beheld <span class='add'>even</span> till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_12">12&#160;</span> As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their lives were prolonged for a season and time.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_13">13&#160;</span> I saw in the night visions, and, behold, <span class='add'>one</span> like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_14">14&#160;</span> And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom <span class='add'>that</span> which shall not be destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN7_15">15&#160;</span>¶ I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of <span class='add'>my</span> <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>body, and the visions of my head troubled me.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_16">16&#160;</span> I came near unto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_17">17&#160;</span> These great beasts, which are four, <span class='add'>are</span> four kings, <span class='add'>which</span> shall arise out of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_18">18&#160;</span> But the saints of the <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_19">19&#160;</span> Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose teeth <span class='add'>were of</span> iron, and his nails <span class='add'>of</span> brass; <span class='add'>which</span> devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;
<span class="verse" id="DN7_20">20&#160;</span> And of the ten horns that <span class='add'>were</span> in his head, and <span class='add'>of</span> the other which came up, and before whom three fell; even <span class='add'>of</span> that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, whose look <span class='add'>was</span> more stout than his fellows.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_21">21&#160;</span> I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them;
<span class="verse" id="DN7_22">22&#160;</span> Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_23">23&#160;</span> Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_24">24&#160;</span> And the ten horns out of this kingdom <span class='add'>are</span> ten kings <span class='add'>that</span> shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_25">25&#160;</span> And he shall speak <span class='add'>great</span> words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of time.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_26">26&#160;</span> But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy <span class='add'>it</span> unto the end.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_27">27&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom <span class='add'>is</span> an everlasting kingdom, and all <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dominions shall serve and obey him.
<span class="verse" id="DN7_28">28&#160;</span> Hitherto <span class='add'>is</span> the end of the matter. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN8_1">1&#160;</span> In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared unto me, <span class='add'>even unto</span> me Daniel, after that which appeared unto me at the first.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_2">2&#160;</span> And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, that I <span class='add'>was</span> at Shushan <span class='add'>in</span> the palace, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Ulai.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_3">3&#160;</span> Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before the river a ram which had <span class='add'>two</span> horns: and the <span class='add'>two</span> horns <span class='add'>were</span> high; but one <span class='add'>was</span> higher than <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the other, and the higher came up last.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_4">4&#160;</span> I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him, neither <span class='add'>was there any</span> that could deliver out of his hand; but he did according to his will, and became great.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_5">5&#160;</span> And as I was considering, behold, an he goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>touched not the ground: and the goat <span class='add'>had</span> <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a notable horn between his eyes.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_6">6&#160;</span> And he came to the ram that had <span class='add'>two</span> horns, which I had seen standing before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_7">7&#160;</span> And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up four notable ones <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>toward the four winds of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_9">9&#160;</span> And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pleasant <span class='add'>land</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_10">10&#160;</span> And it waxed great, <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to the host of heaven; and it cast down <span class='add'>some</span> of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_11">11&#160;</span> Yea, he magnified <span class='add'>himself</span> even <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to the prince of the host, and <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by him the daily <span class='add'>sacrifice</span> was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_12">12&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an host was given <span class='add'>him</span> against the daily <span class='add'>sacrifice</span> by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it practised, and prospered.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN8_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that certain <span class='add'>saint</span> which spake, How long <span class='add'>shall be</span> the vision <span class='add'>concerning</span> the daily <span class='add'>sacrifice</span>, and the transgression <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?
<span class="verse" id="DN8_14">14&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>days; then shall the sanctuary be <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cleansed.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN8_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when I, <span class='add'>even</span> I Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stood before me as the appearance of a man.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_16">16&#160;</span> And I heard a man’s voice between <span class='add'>the banks of</span> Ulai, which called, and said, <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gabriel, make this <span class='add'>man</span> to understand the vision.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_17">17&#160;</span> So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end <span class='add'>shall be</span> the vision.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_18">18&#160;</span> Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set me upright.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_19">19&#160;</span> And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time appointed the end <span class='add'>shall be</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_20">20&#160;</span> The ram which thou sawest having <span class='add'>two</span> horns <span class='add'>are</span> the kings of Media and Persia.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_21">21&#160;</span> And the rough goat <span class='add'>is</span> the king of Grecia: and the great horn that <span class='add'>is</span> between his eyes <span class='add'>is</span> the first king.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_22">22&#160;</span> Now that being broken, whereas four stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his power.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_23">23&#160;</span> And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_24">24&#160;</span> And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and the <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>holy people.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_25">25&#160;</span> And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify <span class='add'>himself</span> in his heart, and by <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shall be <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>broken without hand.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_26">26&#160;</span> And the vision of the evening and the morning which was told <span class='add'>is</span> true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it <span class='add'>shall be</span> for many days.
<span class="verse" id="DN8_27">27&#160;</span> And I Daniel fainted, and was sick <span class='add'>certain</span> days; afterward I rose up, and did the king’s business; and I was astonished at the vision, but none understood <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN9_1">1&#160;</span> In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans;
<span class="verse" id="DN9_2">2&#160;</span> In the first year of his reign I Daniel understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN9_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And I set my face unto the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN9_4">4&#160;</span> And I prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, and made my confession, and said, O <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his commandments;
<span class="verse" id="DN9_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments:
<span class="verse" id="DN9_6">6&#160;</span> Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_7">7&#160;</span> O Lord, righteousness <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>belongeth</span> unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel, <span class='add'>that are</span> near, and <span class='add'>that are</span> far off, through all the countries whither thou hast driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_8">8&#160;</span> O Lord, <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to us <span class='add'>belongeth</span> confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_9">9&#160;</span> To the Lord our God <span class='add'>belong</span> mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him;
<span class="verse" id="DN9_10">10&#160;</span> Neither have we obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_11">11&#160;</span> Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that <span class='add'>is</span> written in the <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>law of Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_12">12&#160;</span> And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not been done as hath been done upon Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_13">13&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>it is</span> written in the law of Moses, all this evil is come upon us: yet <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made we not our prayer before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God <span class='add'>is</span> righteous in all his works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_15">15&#160;</span> And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gotten thee <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>renown, as at this day; we have sinned, we have done wickedly.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN9_16">16&#160;</span>¶ O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people <span class='add'>are become</span> a reproach to all <span class='add'>that are</span> about us.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_17">17&#160;</span> Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_18">18&#160;</span> O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which is called by thy name: for we do not <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_19">19&#160;</span> O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy people are called by thy name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN9_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And whiles I <span class='add'>was</span> speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God for the holy mountain of my God;
<span class="verse" id="DN9_21">21&#160;</span>Yea, whiles I <span class='add'>was</span> speaking in prayer, even the man <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_22">22&#160;</span> And he informed <span class='add'>me</span>, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to give thee skill and understanding.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_23">23&#160;</span> At the beginning of thy supplications the <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandment came forth, and I am come to shew <span class='add'>thee;</span> for thou <span class='add'>art</span> <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>greatly beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_24">24&#160;</span> Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to finish the transgression, and <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_25">25&#160;</span> Know therefore and understand, <span class='add'>that</span> from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince <span class='add'>shall be</span> seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the street <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be built again, and the <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wall, even <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in troublous times.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_26">26&#160;</span> And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>but not for himself: and the people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> with a flood, and unto the end of the war <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>desolations are determined.
<span class="verse" id="DN9_27">27&#160;</span> And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for the overspreading of <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>abominations he shall make <span class='add'>it</span> desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN10_1">1&#160;</span> In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar; and the thing <span class='add'>was</span> true, but the time appointed <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>long: and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_2">2&#160;</span> In those days I Daniel was mourning three <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>full weeks.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_3">3&#160;</span> I ate no <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_4">4&#160;</span> And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hiddekel;
<span class="verse" id="DN10_5">5&#160;</span> Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>girded with fine gold of Uphaz:
<span class="verse" id="DN10_6">6&#160;</span> His body also <span class='add'>was</span> like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_7">7&#160;</span> And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_9">9&#160;</span> Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my face, and my face toward the ground. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN10_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, an hand touched me, which <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set me upon my knees and <span class='add'>upon</span> the palms of my hands.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_11">11&#160;</span> And he said unto me, O Daniel, <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thee, and <a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stand upright: for unto thee am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word unto me, I stood trembling.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_12">12&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_13">13&#160;</span> But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_14">14&#160;</span> Now I am come to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision <span class='add'>is</span> for <span class='add'>many</span> days.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_15">15&#160;</span> And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_16">16&#160;</span>And, behold, <span class='add'>one</span> like the similitude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_17">17&#160;</span> For how can <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me, neither is there breath left in me.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_18">18&#160;</span> Then there came again and touched me <span class='add'>one</span> like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me,
<span class="verse" id="DN10_19">19&#160;</span> And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: peace <span class='add'>be</span> unto thee, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_20">20&#160;</span> Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee? and now will I return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.
<span class="verse" id="DN10_21">21&#160;</span> But I will shew thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth: and <span class='add'>there is</span> none that <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN11_1">1&#160;</span> Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, <span class='add'>even</span> I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_2">2&#160;</span> And now will I shew thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall be far richer than <span class='add'>they</span> all: and by his strength through his riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_3">3&#160;</span> And a mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_4">4&#160;</span> And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN11_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the king of the south shall be strong, and <span class='add'>one</span> of his princes; and he shall be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion <span class='add'>shall be</span> a great dominion.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_6">6&#160;</span> And in the end of years they <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall join themselves together; for the king’s daughter of the south shall come to the king of the north to make <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an agreement: but she shall not retain the power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be given up, and they that brought her, and <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he that begat her, and he that strengthened her in <span class='add'>these</span> times.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_7">7&#160;</span> But out of a branch of her roots shall <span class='add'>one</span> stand up in his estate, which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail:
<span class="verse" id="DN11_8">8&#160;</span> And shall also carry captives into Egypt their gods, with their princes, <span class='add'>and</span> with <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their precious vessels of silver and of gold; and he shall continue <span class='add'>more</span> years than the king of the north.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_9">9&#160;</span> So the king of the south shall come into <span class='add'>his</span> kingdom, and shall return into his own land.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_10">10&#160;</span> But his sons <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall be stirred up, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and <span class='add'>one</span> shall certainly come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and be stirred up, <span class='add'>even</span> to his fortress.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_11">11&#160;</span> And the king of the south shall be moved with choler, and shall come forth and fight with him, <span class='add'>even</span> with the king of the north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but the multitude shall be given into his hand.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down <span class='add'>many</span> ten thousands: but he shall not be strengthened <span class='add'>by it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_13">13&#160;</span> For the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, and shall certainly come <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>after certain years with a great army and with much riches.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_14">14&#160;</span> And in those times there shall many stand up against the king of the south: also <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the robbers of thy people shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall fall.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_15">15&#160;</span> So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mount, and take <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shall not withstand, neither <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his chosen people, neither <span class='add'>shall there be any</span> strength to withstand.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_16">16&#160;</span> But he that cometh against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall stand in the <a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_17">17&#160;</span> He shall also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole kingdom, and <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upright ones with him; thus shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>corrupting her: but she shall not stand <span class='add'>on his side</span>, neither be for him.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_18">18&#160;</span> After this shall he turn his face unto the isles, and shall take many: but a prince <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for his own behalf shall cause <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the reproach offered by him to cease; without his own reproach he shall cause <span class='add'>it</span> to turn upon him.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_19">19&#160;</span> Then he shall turn his face toward the fort of his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_20">20&#160;</span> Then shall stand up in his estate <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a raiser of taxes <span class='add'>in</span> the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>anger, nor in battle.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN11_21">21&#160;</span> And in his estate shall stand up a vile person, to whom they shall not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_22">22&#160;</span> And with the arms of a flood shall they be overflown from before him, and shall be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_23">23&#160;</span> And after the league <span class='add'>made</span> with him he shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall become strong with a small people.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_24">24&#160;</span> He shall enter <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>peaceably even upon the fattest places of the province; and he shall do <span class='add'>that</span> which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers’ fathers; he shall scatter among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: <span class='add'>yea</span>, and he shall <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>forecast his devices against the strong holds, even for a time.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_25">25&#160;</span> And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty army; but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices against him.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_26">26&#160;</span> Yea, they that feed of the portion of his meat shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: and many shall fall down slain.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_27">27&#160;</span> And both these kings’ <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hearts <span class='add'>shall be</span> to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not prosper: for yet the end <span class='add'>shall be</span> at the time appointed.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_28">28&#160;</span> Then shall he return into his land with great riches; and his heart <span class='add'>shall be</span> against the holy covenant; and he shall do <span class='add'>exploits</span>, and return to his own land.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_29">29&#160;</span> At the time appointed he shall return, and come toward the south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the latter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN11_30">30&#160;</span>¶ For the ships of Chittim shall come against him: therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_31">31&#160;</span> And arms shall stand on his part, and they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the daily <span class='add'>sacrifice</span>, and they shall place the abomination that <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>maketh desolate.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_32">32&#160;</span> And such as do wickedly against the covenant shall he <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do <span class='add'>exploits</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_33">33&#160;</span> And they that understand among the people shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, <span class='add'>many</span> days.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_34">34&#160;</span> Now when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with flatteries.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_35">35&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>some</span> of them of understanding shall fall, to try <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>them, and to purge, and to make <span class='add'>them</span> white, <span class='add'>even</span> to the time of the end: because <span class='add'>it is</span> yet for a time appointed.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_36">36&#160;</span> And the king shall do according to his will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that that is determined shall be done.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_37">37&#160;</span> Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall magnify himself above all.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_38">38&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in his estate shall he honour the God of <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant things.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_39">39&#160;</span> Thus shall he do in the <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge <span class='add'>and</span> increase with glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gain.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_40">40&#160;</span> And at the time of the end shall the king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_41">41&#160;</span> He shall enter also into the <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>glorious land, and many <span class='add'>countries</span> shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out of his hand, <span class='add'>even</span> Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_42">42&#160;</span> He shall <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_43">43&#160;</span> But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians <span class='add'>shall be</span> at his steps.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_44">44&#160;</span> But tidings out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make away many.
<span class="verse" id="DN11_45">45&#160;</span> And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palace between the seas in the <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DN12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN12_1">1&#160;</span> And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation <span class='add'>even</span> to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_2">2&#160;</span> And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>some to everlasting life, and some to shame <span class='add'>and</span> everlasting contempt.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_3">3&#160;</span> And they that be <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wise shall <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_4">4&#160;</span> But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, <span class='add'>even</span> to the time of the end: many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DN12_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two, the one on this side of the <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_6">6&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> said to the man clothed in <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>linen, which <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upon the waters of the river, How long <span class='add'>shall it be to</span> the end of these wonders?
<span class="verse" id="DN12_7">7&#160;</span> And I heard the man clothed in linen, which <span class='add'>was</span> upon the waters of the river, when he <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that <span class='add'>it shall be</span> for a time, times, and <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an half; and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these <span class='add'>things</span> shall be finished.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_8">8&#160;</span> And I heard, but I understood not: then said I, O my Lord, what <span class='add'>shall be</span> the end of these <span class='add'>things</span>?
<span class="verse" id="DN12_9">9&#160;</span> And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words <span class='add'>are</span> closed up and sealed till the time of the end.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_10">10&#160;</span> Many shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_11">11&#160;</span> And from the time <span class='add'>that</span> the daily <span class='add'>sacrifice</span> shall be taken away, and <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the abomination that <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>maketh desolate set up, <span class='add'>there shall be</span> a thousand two hundred and ninety days.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_12">12&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.
<span class="verse" id="DN12_13">13&#160;</span> But go thou thy way till the end <span class='add'>be:</span> <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for thou shalt rest, and stand in <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy lot at the end of the days.</div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin <a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_1'>24. 1</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_6'>36. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the wine of his drink.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sadder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, term, or, continuance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the steward.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits us]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of pulse.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that we may eat, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he made Daniel understand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN1_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wisdom of understanding.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN3_29'>3. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. made pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_17'>5. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. buy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. returned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, chief marshal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. chief of the executioners, or, slaughtermen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. from before God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that they should not destroy Daniel, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS113_2'>113 2</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_18'>115. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. That I have found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. children of the captivity of Judah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. hath made known</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. came up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. wast seeing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sides.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_45'>45.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_42"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, brittle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_43"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. this with this.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. their days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 4. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_3'>3</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_34'>34</a>. &amp;c <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_26'>6. 26</a>. &amp;c 7. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_14'>14</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_27'>27</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_7'>4. 7</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. kingdom thereof</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_45"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, which was not in hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_45"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. after this.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN2_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.48</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_9'>4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. with might.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. they command.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, singing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. symphony.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. have set no regard upon thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_13'>21. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_15"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits burning]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 thy]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. filled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. mighty of strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mantles.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, turbans.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spark.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, governors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. there is no hurt in them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. door.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. a decres is made by me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. error.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_5'>2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. made pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN3_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. made to prosper.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. It was seemly before me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_44'>2. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_48'>2. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. I was seeing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald with might.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_21'>5. 21</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, an healing of thine error.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.34</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_14'>7 14</a>. Mic <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_7'>4 7</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN4_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_12'>9. 12</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_9'>45. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. brought forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. brightnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald changed it</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, girdles.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. bindings, or, knots.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. with might.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, purple.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. brightnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_48'>2. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grandfather.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grandfather.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_9'>4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of an interpreter, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of a dissolver.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald knots</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grandfather.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. interpret.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_6'>2 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or to deal proudly</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald made to come down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_32'>4. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he made his heart equal, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. he as the son of, &amp;c</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN5_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, now.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, came tumultuously</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, interdict.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Esth. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_1'>2 1</a> &amp;c <a href='EST.xhtml#ET8_8'>8. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. passeth not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_48'>8 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS55_17'>55. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 captivity of the children]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, table.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_44'>2 44</a>. &amp;c <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_3'>4 3</a>. &amp;c 7. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_14'>14</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_27'>27</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hand</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN6_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN1_21'>1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald saw.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wherewith.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, it raised up one dominion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV5_11'>5. 11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV20_12'>20. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. a prolonging in life was given them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_44'>2 44</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_7'>4. 7</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. sheath</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. high ones, that is, things, or, places.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. from all those.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN7_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, rulers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the second.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, none touched him in the earth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a horn of sight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_4'>11 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_2'>18 2</a> Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_6'>20. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against the host.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from him</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the host was given over for the transgression against the daily sacrifice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the numberer of secrets, or, the wonderful numberer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Palmoni.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, making desolate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. evening morning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. justified.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_21'>9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made me stand upon my standing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are accomplished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. people of the holy ones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prosperity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN8_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.25</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Macc. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_9'>9. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in which he, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_12'>25. 12</a> &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR29_10'>29 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_9'>7 9</a>. Neh <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_5'>1 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Bar. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_17'>1. 17</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thou hast, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Bar <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_15'>1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_14'>26. 14</a>, &amp;c. Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>28. 15</a>, &amp;c. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_20'>29 20</a>, &amp;c &amp;c 30. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_17'>17</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_18'>18</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT31_17'>31. 17</a>, &amp;c. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_19'>32. 19</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_14'>26. 14</a> Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>28. 15</a> Lam <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_17'>2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. intreated we not the face of the &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made thee a name.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_18'>14. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb whereupon thy name is called.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cause to fall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN8_16'>8. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with weariness, or, flight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to make thee skilful of understanding</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a man of desires.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to restrain.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to seal up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb prophet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb shall return and be built.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, breach, or, ditch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb in strait of times.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and shall have nothing</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, it shall be cut off by desolations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with the abominable armies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN9_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_15'>24 15</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_14'>13. 14</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_20'>21. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. great.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weeks of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bread of desires.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_14'>2. 14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. one man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. 1 <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_13'>13</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_14'>14</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_15'>15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, vigour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_28'>7. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. moved.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of desires.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb stand upon thy standing</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the first</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, this servant of my lord.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN10_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strengtheneth himself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall associate themselves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rights.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, whom she brought forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vessels of their desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall war.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the end of times of years.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the children of robbers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the city of munitions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the people of his choices.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goodly land</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the land of ornament.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, much uprightness: or, equal conditions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb to corrupt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his reproach.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. one that causeth an ex acter to pass over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. angers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, into the peaceable and fat, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. think his thoughts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. their hearts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, astonisheth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cause to dissemble.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_35"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, by them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as for the almighty God, in his seat he shall honour, yea, he shall honour a god whom, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_38"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, munitions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Mauzzim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. things desired.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fortresses of munitions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a price.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_41"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goodly land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_41"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb land of delight, or, ornament.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. send forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_45"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goodly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN11_45"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb mountain of delight of holiness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_46'>25 46</a> John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_29'>5. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, teachers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_43'>13. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN10_5'>10 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from above.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV10_5'>10 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, part.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to set up the abomination, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, astonisheth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and thou, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DN12_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
