<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Deuteronomy 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Deuteronomy</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_0'>34</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='DT0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Fifth Book of Moses, called Deuteronomy  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="DT1_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>be</span> the words which Moses spake unto all Israel on this side Jordan in the wilderness, in the plain over against <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the Red <span class='add'>sea</span>, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_2">2&#160;</span>(<span class='add'>There are</span> eleven days’ <span class='add'>journey</span> from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadesh-barnea.)
<span class="verse" id="DT1_3">3&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> Moses spake unto the children of Israel, according unto all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had given him in commandment unto them;
<span class="verse" id="DT1_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei:
<span class="verse" id="DT1_5">5&#160;</span> On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT1_6">6&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount:
<span class="verse" id="DT1_7">7&#160;</span> Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all <span class='add'>the places</span> nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river Euphrates.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, I have <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set the land before you: go in and possess the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto your fathers, <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT1_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone:
<span class="verse" id="DT1_10">10&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye <span class='add'>are</span> this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_11">11&#160;</span>(The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye <span class='add'>are</span>, and bless you, as he hath promised you!)
<span class="verse" id="DT1_12">12&#160;</span> How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
<span class="verse" id="DT1_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_14">14&#160;</span> And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken <span class='add'>is</span> good <span class='add'>for us</span> to do.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_15">15&#160;</span> So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and officers among your tribes.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_16">16&#160;</span> And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear <span class='add'>the causes</span> between your brethren, and <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>judge righteously between <span class='add'>every</span> man and his brother, and the stranger <span class='add'>that is</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Ye shall not <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>respect persons in judgment; <span class='add'>but</span> ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgment <span class='add'>is</span> God’s: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring <span class='add'>it</span> unto me, and I will hear it.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_18">18&#160;</span> And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT1_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And when we departed from Horeb, we went through all that great and terrible wilderness, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God commanded us; and we came to Kadesh-barnea.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_20">20&#160;</span> And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God doth give unto us.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_21">21&#160;</span> Behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath set the land before thee: go up <span class='add'>and</span> possess <span class='add'>it</span>, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of thy fathers hath said unto thee; fear not, neither be discouraged. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT1_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We will send men before us, and they shall search us out the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shall come.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_23">23&#160;</span> And the saying pleased me well: and <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I took twelve men of you, one of a tribe:
<span class="verse" id="DT1_24">24&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they turned and went up into the mountain, and came unto the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_25">25&#160;</span> And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, <span class='add'>It is</span> a good land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God doth give us.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_26">26&#160;</span> Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebelled against the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God:
<span class="verse" id="DT1_27">27&#160;</span> And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_28">28&#160;</span> Whither shall we go up? our brethren have <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discouraged our heart, saying, The people <span class='add'>is</span> greater and taller than we; the cities <span class='add'>are</span> great and walled up to heaven; and moreover we have seen the sons of the <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Anakims there.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_29">29&#160;</span> Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_30">30&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God which goeth before you, he shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes;
<span class="verse" id="DT1_31">31&#160;</span> And in the wilderness, where thou hast seen how that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God bare thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came into this place.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_32">32&#160;</span> Yet in this thing ye did not believe the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God,
<span class="verse" id="DT1_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your tents <span class='add'>in</span>, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and in a cloud by day.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_34">34&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and sware, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT1_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see that good land, which I sware to give unto your fathers,
<span class="verse" id="DT1_36">36&#160;</span> Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath trodden upon, and to his children, because he hath <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wholly followed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_37">37&#160;</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Also the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was angry with me for your sakes, saying, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou also shalt not go in thither.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thee, he shall go in thither: encourage him: for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_39">39&#160;</span> Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, and your children, which in that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and they shall possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_40">40&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for</span> you, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_41">41&#160;</span> Then ye answered and said unto me, <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>We have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, we will go up and fight, according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God commanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go up into the hill.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_42">42&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, neither fight; for I <span class='add'>am</span> not among you; lest ye be smitten before your enemies.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_43">43&#160;</span> So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebelled against the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>went presumptuously up into the hill.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_44">44&#160;</span> And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and destroyed you in Seir, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Hormah.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_45">45&#160;</span> And ye returned and wept before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you.
<span class="verse" id="DT1_46">46&#160;</span> So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye abode <span class='add'>there</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT2_1">1&#160;</span> Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto me: and we compassed mount Seir many days.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT2_3">3&#160;</span> Ye have compassed this mountain long enough: turn you northward.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_4">4&#160;</span> And command thou the people, saying, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> to pass through the coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dwell in Seir; and they shall be afraid of you: take ye good heed unto yourselves therefore:
<span class="verse" id="DT2_5">5&#160;</span> Meddle not with them; for I will not give you of their land, <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>no, not so much as a foot breadth; <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because I have given mount Seir unto Esau <span class='add'>for</span> a possession.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_6">6&#160;</span> Ye shall buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shall also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_7">7&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness: these forty years the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>hath been</span> with thee; thou hast lacked nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT2_8">8&#160;</span> And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from Ezion-gaber, we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle: for I will not give thee of their land <span class='add'>for</span> a possession; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot <span class='add'>for</span> a possession.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_10">10&#160;</span> The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims;
<span class="verse" id="DT2_11">11&#160;</span> Which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims; but the Moabites call them Emims.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stead; as Israel did unto the land of his possession, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave unto them.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_13">13&#160;</span> Now rise up, <span class='add'>said I</span>, and get you over <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brook Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_14">14&#160;</span> And the space in which we came from Kadesh-barnea, until we were come over the brook Zered, <span class='add'>was</span> thirty and eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto them.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_15">15&#160;</span> For indeed the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was against them, to destroy them from among the host, until they were consumed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT2_16">16&#160;</span>¶ So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people,
<span class="verse" id="DT2_17">17&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT2_18">18&#160;</span> Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day:
<span class="verse" id="DT2_19">19&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon <span class='add'>any</span> possession; because I have given it unto the children of Lot <span class='add'>for</span> a possession.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_20">20&#160;</span>(That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims;
<span class="verse" id="DT2_21">21&#160;</span> A people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> destroyed them before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead:
<span class="verse" id="DT2_22">22&#160;</span> As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day:
<span class="verse" id="DT2_23">23&#160;</span> And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT2_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land: <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>begin to possess <span class='add'>it</span>, and contend with him in battle.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_25">25&#160;</span> This day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the nations <span class='add'>that are</span> under the whole heaven, who shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT2_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT2_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Let me pass through thy land: I will go along by the high way, I will neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_28">28&#160;</span> Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink: only I will pass through on my feet;
<span class="verse" id="DT2_29">29&#160;</span>(As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in Ar, did unto me;) until I shall pass over Jordan into the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God giveth us.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_30">30&#160;</span> But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as <span class='add'>appeareth</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_31">31&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thee: begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to fight at Jahaz.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_33">33&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God delivered him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_34">34&#160;</span> And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the men, and the women, and the little ones, of every city, we left none to remain:
<span class="verse" id="DT2_35">35&#160;</span> Only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.
<span class="verse" id="DT2_36">36&#160;</span> From Aroer, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the brink of the river of Arnon, and <span class='add'>from</span> the city that <span class='add'>is</span> by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city too strong for us: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God delivered all unto us:
<span class="verse" id="DT2_37">37&#160;</span> Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not, <span class='add'>nor</span> unto any place of the river Jabbok, nor unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God forbad us.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT3_1">1&#160;</span> Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Fear him not: for I will deliver him, and all his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_3">3&#160;</span> So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God delivered into our hands <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people: and we smote him until none was left to him remaining.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_4">4&#160;</span> And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a city which we took not from them, threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_5">5&#160;</span> All these cities <span class='add'>were</span> fenced with high walls, gates, and bars; beside unwalled towns a great many.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_6">6&#160;</span> And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every city.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_7">7&#160;</span> But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_8">8&#160;</span> And we took at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites the land that <span class='add'>was</span> on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon;
<span class="verse" id="DT3_9">9&#160;</span>(<span class='add'>Which</span> Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion; and the Amorites call it Shenir;)
<span class="verse" id="DT3_10">10&#160;</span> All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_11">11&#160;</span> For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold, his bedstead <span class='add'>was</span> a bedstead of iron; <span class='add'>is</span> it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? nine cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT3_12">12&#160;</span> And this land, <span class='add'>which</span> we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_13">13&#160;</span> And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, <span class='add'>being</span> the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh; all the region of Argob, with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_14">14&#160;</span> Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name, Bashan-<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>havoth-jair, unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_15">15&#160;</span> And I gave Gilead unto Machir.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_16">16&#160;</span> And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto the river Arnon half the valley, and the border even unto the river Jabbok, <span class='add'>which is</span> the border of the children of Ammon;
<span class="verse" id="DT3_17">17&#160;</span> The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast <span class='add'>thereof</span>, from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, <span class='add'>even</span> the salt sea, <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>under Ashdoth-pisgah eastward.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT3_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And I commanded you at that time, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath given you this land to possess it: <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all <span class='add'>that are</span> <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>meet for the war.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_19">19&#160;</span> But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (<span class='add'>for</span> I know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I have given you;
<span class="verse" id="DT3_20">20&#160;</span> Until the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have given rest unto your brethren, as well as unto you, and <span class='add'>until</span> they also possess the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and <span class='add'>then</span> shall ye <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>return every man unto his possession, which I have given you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT3_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath done unto these two kings: so shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_22">22&#160;</span> Ye shall not fear them: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God he shall fight for you.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_23">23&#160;</span> And I besought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> at that time, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT3_24">24&#160;</span> O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand: for what God <span class='add'>is there</span> in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to thy might?
<span class="verse" id="DT3_25">25&#160;</span> I pray thee, let me go over, and see the good land that <span class='add'>is</span> beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_26">26&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Let it suffice thee; speak no more unto me of this matter.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_27">27&#160;</span> Get thee up into the top of <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold <span class='add'>it</span> with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_28">28&#160;</span> But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see.
<span class="verse" id="DT3_29">29&#160;</span> So we abode in the valley over against Beth-peor.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT4_1">1&#160;</span> Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I teach you, for to do <span class='add'>them</span>, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers giveth you.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish <span class='add'>ought</span> from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God which I command you.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_3">3&#160;</span> Your eyes have seen what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did because of <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Baal-peor: for all the men that followed Baal-peor, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath destroyed them from among you.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_4">4&#160;</span> But ye that did cleave unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>are</span> alive every one of you this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_5">5&#160;</span> Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_6">6&#160;</span> Keep therefore and do <span class='add'>them;</span> for this <span class='add'>is</span> your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation <span class='add'>is</span> a wise and understanding people.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_7">7&#160;</span> For what nation <span class='add'>is there so</span> great, who <span class='add'>hath</span> God <span class='add'>so</span> nigh unto them, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God <span class='add'>is</span> in all <span class='add'>things that</span> we call upon him <span class='add'>for</span>?
<span class="verse" id="DT4_8">8&#160;</span> And what nation <span class='add'>is there so</span> great, that hath statutes and judgments <span class='add'>so</span> righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?
<span class="verse" id="DT4_9">9&#160;</span> Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons’ sons;
<span class="verse" id="DT4_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Specially</span> the day that thou stoodest before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in Horeb, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Gather me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and <span class='add'>that</span> they may teach their children.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_11">11&#160;</span> And ye came near and stood under the mountain; and the <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mountain burned with fire unto the <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>midst of heaven, with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>only <span class='add'>ye heard</span> a voice.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_13">13&#160;</span> And he declared unto you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, <span class='add'>even</span> ten commandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of stone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT4_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_15">15&#160;</span> Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_16">16&#160;</span> Lest ye corrupt <span class='add'>yourselves</span>, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness of male or female,
<span class="verse" id="DT4_17">17&#160;</span> The likeness of any beast that <span class='add'>is</span> on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air,
<span class="verse" id="DT4_18">18&#160;</span> The likeness of any thing that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that <span class='add'>is</span> in the waters beneath the earth:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_19">19&#160;</span> And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, <span class='add'>even</span> all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>divided unto all nations under the whole heaven.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_20">20&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, <span class='add'>even</span> out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, as <span class='add'>ye are</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_21">21&#160;</span> Furthermore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was angry with me for your sakes, and sware that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that good land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_22">22&#160;</span> But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye shall go over, and possess that good land.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_23">23&#160;</span> Take heed unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, <span class='add'>or</span> the likeness of any <span class='add'>thing</span>, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath forbidden thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_24">24&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> a consuming fire, <span class='add'>even</span> a jealous God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT4_25">25&#160;</span>¶ When thou shalt beget children, and children’s children, and <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>ye shall have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt <span class='add'>yourselves</span>, and make a graven image, <span class='add'>or</span> the likeness of any <span class='add'>thing</span>, and shall do evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to provoke him to anger:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_26">26&#160;</span> I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong <span class='add'>your</span> days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_27">27&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall lead you.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_28">28&#160;</span> And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men’s hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_29">29&#160;</span> But if from thence thou shalt seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, thou shalt find <span class='add'>him</span>, if thou seek him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_30">30&#160;</span> When thou art in tribulation, and all these things <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are come upon thee, <span class='add'>even</span> in the latter days, if thou turn to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice;
<span class="verse" id="DT4_31">31&#160;</span>(For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> a merciful God;) he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_32">32&#160;</span> For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the earth, and <span class='add'>ask</span> from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath been <span class='add'>any such thing</span> as this great thing <span class='add'>is</span>, or hath been heard like it?
<span class="verse" id="DT4_33">33&#160;</span>Did <span class='add'>ever</span> people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?
<span class="verse" id="DT4_34">34&#160;</span> Or hath God assayed to go <span class='add'>and</span> take him a nation from the midst of <span class='add'>another</span> nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great terrors, according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
<span class="verse" id="DT4_35">35&#160;</span> Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> he <span class='add'>is</span> God; <span class='add'>there is</span> none else beside him.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_36">36&#160;</span> Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee: and upon earth he shewed thee his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_37">37&#160;</span> And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power out of Egypt;
<span class="verse" id="DT4_38">38&#160;</span> To drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou <span class='add'>art</span>, to bring thee in, to give thee their land <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_39">39&#160;</span> Know therefore this day, and consider <span class='add'>it</span> in thine heart, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> he <span class='add'>is</span> God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: <span class='add'>there is</span> none else.
<span class="verse" id="DT4_40">40&#160;</span> Thou shalt keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, and that thou mayest prolong <span class='add'>thy</span> days upon the earth, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT4_41">41&#160;</span>¶ Then Moses severed three cities on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;
<span class="verse" id="DT4_42">42&#160;</span> That the slayer might flee thither, which should kill his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that fleeing unto one of these cities he might live:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Namely</span>, <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT4_44">44&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is</span> the law which Moses set before the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_45">45&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Moses spake unto the children of Israel, after they came forth out of Egypt,
<span class="verse" id="DT4_46">46&#160;</span> On this side Jordan, in the valley over against Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>smote, after they were come forth out of Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="DT4_47">47&#160;</span> And they possessed his land, and the land <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, which <span class='add'>were</span> on this side Jordan toward the sunrising;
<span class="verse" id="DT4_48">48&#160;</span> From Aroer, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the bank of the river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which <span class='add'>is</span> Hermon,
<span class="verse" id="DT4_49">49&#160;</span> And all the plain <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>springs of Pisgah.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT5_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>keep, and do them.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, <span class='add'>even</span> us, who <span class='add'>are</span> all of us here alive this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_4">4&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire,
<span class="verse" id="DT5_5">5&#160;</span>(I stood between the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and you at that time, to shew you the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT5_6">6&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bondage.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_7">7&#160;</span> Thou shalt have none other gods before me.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_8">8&#160;</span> Thou shalt not make thee <span class='add'>any</span> graven image, <span class='add'>or</span> any likeness <span class='add'>of any thing</span> that <span class='add'>is</span> in heaven above, or that <span class='add'>is</span> in the earth beneath, or that <span class='add'>is</span> in the waters beneath the earth:
<span class="verse" id="DT5_9">9&#160;</span> Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>am</span> a jealous God, <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth <span class='add'>generation</span> of them that hate me,
<span class="verse" id="DT5_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_11">11&#160;</span> Thou shalt not take the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in vain: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not hold <span class='add'>him</span> guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_12">12&#160;</span> Keep the sabbath day to sanctify it, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath commanded thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_13">13&#160;</span> Six days thou shalt labour, and do all thy work:
<span class="verse" id="DT5_14">14&#160;</span> But the seventh day <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sabbath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: <span class='add'>in it</span> thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_15">15&#160;</span> And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT5_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Honour thy father and thy mother, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with thee, in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt not kill.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Neither shalt thou commit adultery.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Neither shalt thou steal.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_20">20&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou bear false witness against thy neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour’s wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbour’s house, his field, or his manservant, or his maidservant, his ox, or his ass, or any <span class='add'>thing</span> that <span class='add'>is</span> thy neighbour’s. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT5_22">22&#160;</span>¶ These words the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice: and he added no more. And he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT5_23">23&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto me, <span class='add'>even</span> all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;
<span class="verse" id="DT5_24">24&#160;</span> And ye said, Behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatness, and <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God doth talk with man, and he <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>liveth.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_25">25&#160;</span> Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume us: if we <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hear the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God any more, then we shall die.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_26">26&#160;</span>For who <span class='add'>is there of</span> all flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we <span class='add'>have</span>, and lived?
<span class="verse" id="DT5_27">27&#160;</span> Go thou near, and hear all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God shall say: and <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>speak thou unto us all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God shall speak unto thee; and we will hear <span class='add'>it</span>, and do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_28">28&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto me; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thee: they have well said all that they have spoken.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_29">29&#160;</span> O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever!
<span class="verse" id="DT5_30">30&#160;</span> Go say to them, Get you into your tents again.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_31">31&#160;</span> But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do <span class='add'>them</span> in the land which I give them to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_32">32&#160;</span> Ye shall observe to do therefore as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath commanded you: ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
<span class="verse" id="DT5_33">33&#160;</span> Ye shall walk in all the ways which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath commanded you, that ye may live, and <span class='add'>that it may be</span> well with you, and <span class='add'>that</span> ye may prolong <span class='add'>your</span> days in the land which ye shall possess.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT6_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do <span class='add'>them</span> in the land whither ye <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>go to possess it:
<span class="verse" id="DT6_2">2&#160;</span> That thou mightest fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT6_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do <span class='add'>it;</span> that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of thy fathers hath promised thee, in the land that floweth with milk and honey. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT6_4">4&#160;</span> Hear, O Israel: The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God <span class='add'>is</span> one <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="DT6_5">5&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_6">6&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart:
<span class="verse" id="DT6_7">7&#160;</span> And thou shalt <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_10">10&#160;</span> And it shall be, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall have brought thee into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not,
<span class="verse" id="DT6_11">11&#160;</span> And houses full of all good <span class='add'>things</span>, which thou filledst not, and wells digged, which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees, which thou plantedst not; <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when thou shalt have eaten and be full;
<span class="verse" id="DT6_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> beware lest thou forget the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bondage.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_13">13&#160;</span> Thou shalt <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_14">14&#160;</span> Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which <span class='add'>are</span> round about you;
<span class="verse" id="DT6_15">15&#160;</span>(For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> a jealous God among you) lest the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God be kindled against thee, and destroy thee from off the face of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ye shall not tempt the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as ye tempted <span class='add'>him</span> in Massah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT6_17">17&#160;</span> Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_18">18&#160;</span> And thou shalt do <span class='add'>that which is</span> right and good in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto thy fathers,
<span class="verse" id="DT6_19">19&#160;</span> To cast out all thine enemies from before thee, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> when thy son asketh thee <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in time to come, saying, What <span class='add'>mean</span> the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God hath commanded you?
<span class="verse" id="DT6_21">21&#160;</span> Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh’s bondmen in Egypt; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand:
<span class="verse" id="DT6_22">22&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shewed signs and wonders, great and <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before our eyes:
<span class="verse" id="DT6_23">23&#160;</span> And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_24">24&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as <span class='add'>it is</span> at this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT6_25">25&#160;</span> And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, as he hath commanded us.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT7_1">1&#160;</span> When the <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;
<span class="verse" id="DT7_2">2&#160;</span> And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, <span class='add'>and</span> utterly destroy them; <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:
<span class="verse" id="DT7_3">3&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_4">4&#160;</span> For they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods: so will the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_5">5&#160;</span> But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For thou <span class='add'>art</span> an holy people unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all people that <span class='add'>are</span> upon the face of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_7">7&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye <span class='add'>were</span> the fewest of all people:
<span class="verse" id="DT7_8">8&#160;</span> But because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> loved you, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_9">9&#160;</span> Know therefore that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, he <span class='add'>is</span> God, the faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations;
<span class="verse" id="DT7_10">10&#160;</span> And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he will not be slack to him that hateth him, he will repay him to his face.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_11">11&#160;</span> Thou shalt therefore keep the commandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I command thee this day, to do them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT7_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore it shall come to pass, <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and do them, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers:
<span class="verse" id="DT7_13">13&#160;</span> And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee: he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt be blessed above all people: <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>there shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will take away from thee all sickness, and will put none of the <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thee; but will lay them upon all <span class='add'>them</span> that hate thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt consume all the people which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that <span class='add'>will be</span> <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a snare unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_17">17&#160;</span> If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations <span class='add'>are</span> more than I; how can I dispossess them?
<span class="verse" id="DT7_18">18&#160;</span> Thou shalt not be afraid of them: <span class='add'>but</span> shalt well remember what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt;
<span class="verse" id="DT7_19">19&#160;</span> The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God brought thee out: so shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God do unto all the people of whom thou art afraid.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from thee, be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_21">21&#160;</span> Thou shalt not be affrighted at them: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> among you, a mighty God and terrible.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_22">22&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>put out those nations before thee by little and little: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_23">23&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall deliver them <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unto thee, and shall destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_24">24&#160;</span> And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: there shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_25">25&#160;</span> The graven images of their gods <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall ye burn with fire: thou <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shalt not desire the silver or gold <span class='add'>that is</span> on them, nor take <span class='add'>it</span> unto thee, lest thou be snared therein: for it <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT7_26">26&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: <span class='add'>but</span> thou shalt utterly detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for it <span class='add'>is</span> a cursed thing.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT8_1">1&#160;</span> All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_2">2&#160;</span> And thou shalt remember all the way which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, <span class='add'>and</span> to prove thee, to know what <span class='add'>was</span> in thine heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or no.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_3">3&#160;</span> And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thee know that man doth <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>not live by bread only, but by every <span class='add'>word</span> that proceedeth out of the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth man live.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_5">5&#160;</span> Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth his son, <span class='add'>so</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God chasteneth thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_7">7&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of valleys and hills;
<span class="verse" id="DT8_8">8&#160;</span> A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; a land <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of oil olive, and honey;
<span class="verse" id="DT8_9">9&#160;</span> A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any <span class='add'>thing</span> in it; a land whose stones <span class='add'>are</span> iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT8_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_11">11&#160;</span> Beware that thou forget not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day:
<span class="verse" id="DT8_12">12&#160;</span>Lest <span class='add'>when</span> thou hast eaten and art full, and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt <span class='add'>therein;</span>
<span class="verse" id="DT8_13">13&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is multiplied;
<span class="verse" id="DT8_14">14&#160;</span> Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage;
<span class="verse" id="DT8_15">15&#160;</span> Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, <span class='add'>wherein were</span> fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where <span class='add'>there was</span> no water; <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint;
<span class="verse" id="DT8_16">16&#160;</span> Who fed thee in the wilderness with <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;
<span class="verse" id="DT8_17">17&#160;</span> And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of <span class='add'>mine</span> hand hath gotten me this wealth.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_18">18&#160;</span> But thou shalt remember the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: for <span class='add'>it is</span> he that giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_19">19&#160;</span> And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.
<span class="verse" id="DT8_20">20&#160;</span> As the nations which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT9_1">1&#160;</span> Hear, O Israel: Thou <span class='add'>art</span> to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fenced up to heaven,
<span class="verse" id="DT9_2">2&#160;</span> A people great and tall, <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and <span class='add'>of whom</span> thou hast heard <span class='add'>say</span>, Who can stand before the children of Anak!
<span class="verse" id="DT9_3">3&#160;</span> Understand therefore this day, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> he which goeth over before thee; <span class='add'>as</span> a <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>consuming fire he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_4">4&#160;</span> Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath cast them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath brought me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth drive them out from before thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_5">5&#160;</span> Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their land: but for the wickedness of these nations the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God doth drive them out from before thee, and that he may perform the word which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_6">6&#160;</span> Understand therefore, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee not this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a stiffnecked people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT9_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Remember, <span class='add'>and</span> forget not, how thou provokedst the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God to wrath in the wilderness: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_8">8&#160;</span> Also in Horeb ye provoked the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to wrath, so that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was angry with you to have destroyed you.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_9">9&#160;</span> When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone, <span class='add'>even</span> the tables of the covenant which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made with you, then <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat bread nor drink water:
<span class="verse" id="DT9_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them <span class='add'>was written</span> according to all the words, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake with you in the mount out of the midst of <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the fire in the day of the assembly.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of forty days and forty nights, <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave me the two tables of stone, <span class='add'>even</span> the tables of the covenant.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Arise, get thee down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted <span class='add'>themselves;</span> they are quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them; they have made them a molten image.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_13">13&#160;</span> Furthermore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto me, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it <span class='add'>is</span> a stiffnecked people:
<span class="verse" id="DT9_14">14&#160;</span> Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven: and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_15">15&#160;</span> So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned with fire: and the two tables of the covenant <span class='add'>were</span> in my two hands.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_16">16&#160;</span> And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, <span class='add'>and</span> had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded you.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_17">17&#160;</span> And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_18">18&#160;</span> And I fell down before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as at the first, forty days and forty nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of all your sins which ye sinned, in doing wickedly in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to provoke him to anger.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_19">19&#160;</span> For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was wroth against you to destroy you. But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened unto me at that time also.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron also the same time.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_21">21&#160;</span> And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, <span class='add'>and</span> ground <span class='add'>it</span> very small, <span class='add'>even</span> until it was as small as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brook that descended out of the mount.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_22">22&#160;</span> And at <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Taberah, and at <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Massah, and at <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to wrath.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_23">23&#160;</span> Likewise when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given you; then ye rebelled against the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_24">24&#160;</span> Ye have been rebellious against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from the day that I knew you.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_25">25&#160;</span> Thus I fell down before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> forty days and forty nights, as I fell down <span class='add'>at the first;</span> because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said he would destroy you.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_26">26&#160;</span> I prayed therefore unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_27">27&#160;</span> Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; look not unto the stubbornness of this people, nor to their wickedness, nor to their sin:
<span class="verse" id="DT9_28">28&#160;</span> Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="DT9_29">29&#160;</span>Yet they <span class='add'>are</span> thy people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT10_1">1&#160;</span> At that time the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thee an ark of wood.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_2">2&#160;</span> And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_3">3&#160;</span> And I made an ark <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables in mine hand.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_4">4&#160;</span> And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, the ten <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandments, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave them unto me.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_5">5&#160;</span> And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT10_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Mosera: <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest’s office in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_7">7&#160;</span> From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT10_8">8&#160;</span>¶ At that time the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to stand before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to minister unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his inheritance, according as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God promised him.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_10">10&#160;</span> And I stayed in the mount, according to the <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>first time, forty days and forty nights; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened unto me at that time also, <span class='add'>and</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> would not destroy thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Arise, <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>take <span class='add'>thy</span> journey before the people, that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT10_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And now, Israel, what doth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God require of thee, but to fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,
<span class="verse" id="DT10_13">13&#160;</span> To keep the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?
<span class="verse" id="DT10_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> thy God, <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the earth <span class='add'>also</span>, with all that therein <span class='add'>is</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_15">15&#160;</span> Only the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, <span class='add'>even</span> you above all people, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_16">16&#160;</span> Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiffnecked.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_17">17&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>is</span> God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible, which <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward:
<span class="verse" id="DT10_18">18&#160;</span> He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_19">19&#160;</span> Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cleave, and swear by his name.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_21">21&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is</span> thy praise, and he <span class='add'>is</span> thy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have seen.
<span class="verse" id="DT10_22">22&#160;</span> Thy fathers went down into Egypt <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with threescore and ten persons; and now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath made thee <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as the stars of heaven for multitude.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_1">1&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments, alway.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_2">2&#160;</span> And know ye this day: for <span class='add'>I speak</span> not with your children which have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm,
<span class="verse" id="DT11_3">3&#160;</span> And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his land;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_4">4&#160;</span> And what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and <span class='add'>how</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath destroyed them unto this day;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_5">5&#160;</span> And what he did unto you in the wilderness, until ye came into this place;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_6">6&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all the <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>substance that <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>was</span> in their possession, in the midst of all Israel:
<span class="verse" id="DT11_7">7&#160;</span> But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he did. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land, whither ye go to possess it;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_9">9&#160;</span> And that ye may prolong <span class='add'>your</span> days in the land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto your fathers to give unto them and to their seed, a land that floweth with milk and honey. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_10">10&#160;</span>¶ For the land, whither thou goest in to possess it, <span class='add'>is</span> not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst <span class='add'>it</span> with thy foot, as a garden of herbs:
<span class="verse" id="DT11_11">11&#160;</span> But the land, whither ye go to possess it, <span class='add'>is</span> a land of hills and valleys, <span class='add'>and</span> drinketh water of the rain of heaven:
<span class="verse" id="DT11_12">12&#160;</span> A land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>careth for: the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>are</span> always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
<span class="verse" id="DT11_14">14&#160;</span> That I will give <span class='add'>you</span> the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_15">15&#160;</span> And I will <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou mayest eat and be full.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_16">16&#160;</span> Take heed to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_17">17&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>then</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and <span class='add'>lest</span> ye perish quickly from off the good land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> giveth you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Therefore shall ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_20">20&#160;</span> And thou shalt write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy gates:
<span class="verse" id="DT11_21">21&#160;</span> That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_22">22&#160;</span>¶ For if ye shall diligently keep all these commandments which I command you, to do them, to love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_23">23&#160;</span> Then will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> drive out all these nations from before you, and ye shall possess greater nations and mightier than yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Every place whereon the soles of your feet shall tread shall be yours: from the wilderness and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea shall your coast be.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_25">25&#160;</span> There shall no man be able to stand before you: <span class='add'>for</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT11_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse;
<span class="verse" id="DT11_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which I command you this day:
<span class="verse" id="DT11_28">28&#160;</span> And a <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_29">29&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath brought thee in unto the land whither thou goest to possess it, that thou shalt put <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Are</span> they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the Canaanites, which dwell in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh?
<span class="verse" id="DT11_31">31&#160;</span> For ye shall pass over Jordan to go in to possess the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God giveth you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell therein.
<span class="verse" id="DT11_32">32&#160;</span> And ye shall observe <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to do all the statutes and judgments which I set before you this day.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT12_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the statutes and judgments, which ye shall observe to do in the land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of thy fathers giveth thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations which ye shall <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>possess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_3">3&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>overthrow their altars, and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_4">4&#160;</span> Ye shall not do so unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT12_5">5&#160;</span> But unto the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God shall <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, <span class='add'>even</span> unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_6">6&#160;</span> And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_7">7&#160;</span> And there ye shall eat before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath blessed thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_8">8&#160;</span> Ye shall not do after all <span class='add'>the things</span> that we do here this day, every man whatsoever <span class='add'>is</span> right in his own eyes.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_9">9&#160;</span> For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God giveth you.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_10">10&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>when</span> ye go over Jordan, and dwell in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God giveth you to inherit, and <span class='add'>when</span> he giveth you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety;
<span class="verse" id="DT12_11">11&#160;</span> Then there shall be a place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither shall ye bring all that I command you; your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and all <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>your choice vows which ye vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_12">12&#160;</span> And ye shall rejoice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that <span class='add'>is</span> within your gates; forasmuch as <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he hath no part nor inheritance with you.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_13">13&#160;</span> Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_14">14&#160;</span> But in the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_15">15&#160;</span> Notwithstanding thou mayest kill and eat flesh in all thy gates, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, according to the blessing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God which he hath given thee: the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Only ye shall not eat the blood; ye shall pour it upon the earth as water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT12_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy freewill offerings, or heave offering of thine hand:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_18">18&#160;</span> But thou must eat them before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that <span class='add'>is</span> within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands unto.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as long as thou livest upon the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT12_20">20&#160;</span>¶ When the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall enlarge thy border, <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as he hath promised thee, and thou shalt say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_21">21&#160;</span> If the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath chosen to put his name there be too far from thee, then thou shalt kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given thee, as I have commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_22">22&#160;</span> Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the clean shall eat <span class='add'>of</span> them alike.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_23">23&#160;</span> Only <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be sure that thou eat not the blood: for the blood <span class='add'>is</span> the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_24">24&#160;</span> Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_25">25&#160;</span> Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do <span class='add'>that which is</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_26">26&#160;</span> Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose:
<span class="verse" id="DT12_27">27&#160;</span> And thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_28">28&#160;</span> Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee for ever, when thou doest <span class='add'>that which is</span> good and right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT12_29">29&#160;</span>¶ When the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, whither thou goest to possess them, and thou <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>succeedest them, and dwellest in their land;
<span class="verse" id="DT12_30">30&#160;</span> Take heed to thyself that thou be not snared <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by following them, after that they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_31">31&#160;</span> Thou shalt not do so unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: for every <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods.
<span class="verse" id="DT12_32">32&#160;</span> What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT13_1">1&#160;</span> If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder,
<span class="verse" id="DT13_2">2&#160;</span> And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them;
<span class="verse" id="DT13_3">3&#160;</span> Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
<span class="verse" id="DT13_4">4&#160;</span> Ye shall walk after the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cleave unto him.
<span class="verse" id="DT13_5">5&#160;</span> And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spoken to turn <span class='add'>you</span> away from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT13_6">6&#160;</span>¶ If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which <span class='add'>is</span> as thine own soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;
<span class="verse" id="DT13_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Namely</span>, of the gods of the people which <span class='add'>are</span> round about you, nigh unto thee, or far off from thee, from the <span class='add'>one</span> end of the earth even unto the <span class='add'>other</span> end of the earth;
<span class="verse" id="DT13_8">8&#160;</span> Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him:
<span class="verse" id="DT13_9">9&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.
<span class="verse" id="DT13_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thee away from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, from the house of <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bondage.
<span class="verse" id="DT13_11">11&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT13_12">12&#160;</span>¶ If thou shalt hear <span class='add'>say</span> in one of thy cities, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath given thee to dwell there, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT13_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Certain</span> men, <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known;
<span class="verse" id="DT13_14">14&#160;</span> Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, <span class='add'>if it be</span> truth, <span class='add'>and</span> the thing certain, <span class='add'>that</span> such abomination is wrought among you;
<span class="verse" id="DT13_15">15&#160;</span> Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that <span class='add'>is</span> therein, and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="DT13_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: and it shall be an heap for ever; it shall not be built again.
<span class="verse" id="DT13_17">17&#160;</span> And there shall cleave nought of the <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cursed thing to thine hand: that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and shew thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers;
<span class="verse" id="DT13_18">18&#160;</span> When thou shalt hearken to the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this day, to do <span class='add'>that which is</span> right in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_1">1&#160;</span>Ye <span class='add'>are</span> the children of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God: <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For thou <span class='add'>art</span> an holy people unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that <span class='add'>are</span> upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>These <span class='add'>are</span> the beasts which ye shall eat: the ox, the sheep, and the goat,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_5">5&#160;</span> The hart, and the roebuck, and the fallow deer, and the wild goat, and the <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_6">6&#160;</span> And every beast that parteth the hoof, and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, <span class='add'>and</span> cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shall eat.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_7">7&#160;</span> Nevertheless these ye shall not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the cloven hoof; <span class='add'>as</span> the camel, and the hare, and the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hoof; <span class='add'>therefore</span> they <span class='add'>are</span> unclean unto you.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_8">8&#160;</span> And the swine, because it divideth the hoof, yet cheweth not the cud, it <span class='add'>is</span> unclean unto you: ye shall not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcase. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_9">9&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>These ye shall eat of all that <span class='add'>are</span> in the waters: all that have fins and scales shall ye eat:
<span class="verse" id="DT14_10">10&#160;</span> And whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat; it <span class='add'>is</span> unclean unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Of</span> all clean birds ye shall eat.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_12">12&#160;</span>But these <span class='add'>are they</span> of which ye shall not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_13">13&#160;</span> And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_14">14&#160;</span> And every raven after his kind,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_15">15&#160;</span> And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_16">16&#160;</span> The little owl, and the great owl, and the swan,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_17">17&#160;</span> And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_18">18&#160;</span> And the stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bat.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_19">19&#160;</span> And every creeping thing that flieth <span class='add'>is</span> unclean unto you: they shall not be eaten.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But of</span> all clean fowls ye may eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall not eat <span class='add'>of</span> any thing that dieth of itself: thou shalt give it unto the stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> in thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest sell it unto an alien: for thou <span class='add'>art</span> an holy people unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_22">22&#160;</span> Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field bringeth forth year by year.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_23">23&#160;</span> And thou shalt eat before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God always.
<span class="verse" id="DT14_24">24&#160;</span> And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to carry it; <span class='add'>or</span> if the place be too far from thee, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose to set his name there, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath blessed thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT14_25">25&#160;</span> Then shalt thou turn <span class='add'>it</span> into money, and bind up the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose:
<span class="verse" id="DT14_26">26&#160;</span> And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul <a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>desireth: and thou shalt eat there before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine household,
<span class="verse" id="DT14_27">27&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the Levite that <span class='add'>is</span> within thy gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT14_28">28&#160;</span>¶ At the end of three years thou shalt bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay <span class='add'>it</span> up within thy gates:
<span class="verse" id="DT14_29">29&#160;</span> And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thee,) and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, which <span class='add'>are</span> within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied; that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hand which thou doest.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT15_1">1&#160;</span> At the end of <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>every</span> seven years thou shalt make a release.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_2">2&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the manner of the release: Every <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>creditor that lendeth <span class='add'>ought</span> unto his neighbour shall release <span class='add'>it;</span> he shall not exact <span class='add'>it</span> of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is called the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> release.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_3">3&#160;</span> Of a foreigner thou mayest exact <span class='add'>it again:</span> but <span class='add'>that</span> which is thine with thy brother thine hand shall release;
<span class="verse" id="DT15_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Save when there shall be no poor among you; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall greatly bless thee in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance to possess it:
<span class="verse" id="DT15_5">5&#160;</span> Only if thou carefully hearken unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to observe to do all these commandments which I command thee this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_6">6&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God blesseth thee, as he promised thee: and <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they shall not reign over thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT15_7">7&#160;</span>¶ If there be among you a poor man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother:
<span class="verse" id="DT15_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need, <span class='add'>in that</span> which he wanteth.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_9">9&#160;</span> Beware that there be not a <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thought in thy <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against thee, and it be sin unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_10">10&#160;</span> Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all that thou puttest thine hand unto.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_11">11&#160;</span> For the poor shall never cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT15_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_13">13&#160;</span> And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:
<span class="verse" id="DT15_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: <span class='add'>of that</span> wherewith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing to day.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_16">16&#160;</span> And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I will not go away from thee; because he loveth thee and thine house, because he is well with thee;
<span class="verse" id="DT15_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust <span class='add'>it</span> through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_18">18&#160;</span> It shall not seem hard unto thee, when thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath been worth a double hired servant <span class='add'>to thee</span>, in serving thee six years: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall bless thee in all that thou doest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT15_19">19&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_20">20&#160;</span> Thou shalt eat <span class='add'>it</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God year by year in the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose, thou and thy household.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And if there be <span class='add'>any</span> blemish therein, <span class='add'>as if it be</span> lame, or blind, <span class='add'>or have</span> any ill blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_22">22&#160;</span> Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean <span class='add'>person shall eat it</span> alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart.
<span class="verse" id="DT15_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Only thou shalt not eat the blood thereof; thou shalt pour it upon the ground as water.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT16_1">1&#160;</span> Observe the <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: for <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the month of Abib the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_2">2&#160;</span> Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose to place his name there.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, <span class='add'>even</span> the bread of affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>coast seven days; neither shall there <span class='add'>any thing</span> of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain all night until the morning.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_5">5&#160;</span> Thou mayest not <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sacrifice the passover within any of <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy gates, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT16_6">6&#160;</span> But at the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose to place his name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_7">7&#160;</span> And thou shalt roast and eat <span class='add'>it</span> in the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy tents.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_8">8&#160;</span> Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day <span class='add'>shall be</span> a <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>solemn assembly to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: thou shalt do no work <span class='add'>therein</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT16_9">9&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Seven weeks shalt thou number unto thee: begin to number the seven weeks from <span class='add'>such time as</span> thou beginnest <span class='add'>to put</span> the sickle to the corn.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt keep the feast of weeks unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God with <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand, which thou shalt give <span class='add'>unto the <span class='nd'>Lord</span> thy God</span>, according as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath blessed thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT16_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt rejoice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that <span class='add'>is</span> within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that <span class='add'>are</span> among you, in the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath chosen to place his name there.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and do these statutes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT16_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>corn and thy wine:
<span class="verse" id="DT16_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that <span class='add'>are</span> within thy gates.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_15">15&#160;</span> Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose: because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT16_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in the place which he shall choose; in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they shall not appear before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> empty:
<span class="verse" id="DT16_17">17&#160;</span> Every man <span class='add'>shall give</span> <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as he is able, according to the blessing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God which he hath given thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT16_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Judges and officers shalt thou make thee in all thy gates, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge the people with just judgment.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_19">19&#160;</span> Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>words of the righteous.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT16_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which thou shalt make thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT16_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Neither shalt thou set thee up <span class='add'>any</span> <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>image; which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hateth.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT17_1">1&#160;</span> Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>any</span> bullock, or <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sheep, wherein is blemish, <span class='add'>or</span> any evilfavouredness: for that <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT17_2">2&#160;</span>¶ If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedness in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, in transgressing his covenant,
<span class="verse" id="DT17_3">3&#160;</span> And hath gone and served other gods, and worshipped them, either the sun, or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded;
<span class="verse" id="DT17_4">4&#160;</span> And it be told thee, and thou hast heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, and enquired diligently, and, behold, <span class='add'>it be</span> true, <span class='add'>and</span> the thing certain, <span class='add'>that</span> such abomination is wrought in Israel:
<span class="verse" id="DT17_5">5&#160;</span> Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman, which have committed that wicked thing, unto thy gates, <span class='add'>even</span> that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with stones, till they die.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death be put to death; <span class='add'>but</span> at the mouth of one witness he shall not be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_7">7&#160;</span> The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people. So thou shalt put the evil away from among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT17_8">8&#160;</span>¶ If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, <span class='add'>being</span> matters of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise, and get thee up into the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose;
<span class="verse" id="DT17_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and enquire; and they shall shew thee the sentence of judgment:
<span class="verse" id="DT17_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt do according to the sentence, which they of that place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose shall shew thee; and thou shalt observe to do according to all that they inform thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT17_11">11&#160;</span> According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence which they shall shew thee, <span class='add'>to</span> the right hand, nor <span class='add'>to</span> the left.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_12">12&#160;</span> And the man that will do presumptuously, <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and will not hearken unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shall die: and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_13">13&#160;</span> And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT17_14">14&#160;</span>¶ When thou art come unto the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like as all the nations that <span class='add'>are</span> about me;
<span class="verse" id="DT17_15">15&#160;</span> Thou shalt in any wise set <span class='add'>him</span> king over thee, whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose: <span class='add'>one</span> from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thee: thou mayest not set a stranger over thee, which <span class='add'>is</span> not thy brother.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_16">16&#160;</span> But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_17">17&#160;</span> Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
<span class="verse" id="DT17_18">18&#160;</span> And it shall be, when he sitteth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of this law in a book out of <span class='add'>that which is</span> before the priests the Levites:
<span class="verse" id="DT17_19">19&#160;</span> And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them:
<span class="verse" id="DT17_20">20&#160;</span> That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, <span class='add'>to</span> the right hand, or <span class='add'>to</span> the left: to the end that he may prolong <span class='add'>his</span> days in his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT18_1">1&#160;</span> The priests the Levites, <span class='add'>and</span> all the tribe of Levi, <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall have no part nor inheritance with Israel: they <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall eat the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire, and his inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_2">2&#160;</span> Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> their inheritance, as he hath said unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT18_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And this shall be the priest’s due from the people, from them that offer a sacrifice, whether <span class='add'>it be</span> ox or sheep; and they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_4">4&#160;</span> The firstfruit <span class='add'>also</span> of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, shalt thou give him.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_5">5&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath chosen him out of all thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, him and his sons for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT18_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourned, and come with all the desire of his mind unto the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall choose;
<span class="verse" id="DT18_7">7&#160;</span> Then he shall minister in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, as all his brethren the Levites <span class='add'>do</span>, which stand there before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_8">8&#160;</span> They shall have like portions to eat, beside <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT18_9">9&#160;</span>¶ When thou art come into the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_10">10&#160;</span> There shall not be found among you <span class='add'>any one</span> that maketh his son or his daughter <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to pass through the fire, <span class='add'>or</span> that useth divination, <span class='add'>or</span> an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch,
<span class="verse" id="DT18_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>necromancer.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_12">12&#160;</span> For all that do these things <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and because of these abominations the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God doth drive them out from before thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_13">13&#160;</span> Thou shalt be <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>perfect with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_14">14&#160;</span> For these nations, which thou shalt <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thee, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath not suffered thee so <span class='add'>to do</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT18_15">15&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken;
<span class="verse" id="DT18_16">16&#160;</span> According to all that thou desiredst of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let me not hear again the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I die not.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_17">17&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, They have well <span class='add'>spoken that</span> which they have spoken.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_19">19&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require <span class='add'>it</span> of him.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_20">20&#160;</span> But the prophet, which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall die.
<span class="verse" id="DT18_21">21&#160;</span> And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not spoken?
<span class="verse" id="DT18_22">22&#160;</span> When a prophet speaketh in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not spoken, <span class='add'>but</span> the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT19_1">1&#160;</span> When the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hath cut off the nations, whose land the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, and thou <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>succeedest them, and dwellest in their cities, and in their houses;
<span class="verse" id="DT19_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT19_3">3&#160;</span> Thou shalt prepare thee a way, and divide the coasts of thy land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee to inherit, into three parts, that every slayer may flee thither. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT19_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is</span> the case of the slayer, which shall flee thither, that he may live: Whoso killeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he hated not <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in time past;
<span class="verse" id="DT19_5">5&#160;</span> As when a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>head slippeth from the <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>helve, and <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shall flee unto one of those cities, and live:
<span class="verse" id="DT19_6">6&#160;</span> Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>slay him; whereas he <span class='add'>was</span> not worthy of death, inasmuch as he hated him not <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in time past.
<span class="verse" id="DT19_7">7&#160;</span> Wherefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt separate three cities for thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT19_8">8&#160;</span> And if the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give unto thy fathers;
<span class="verse" id="DT19_9">9&#160;</span> If thou shalt keep all these commandments to do them, which I command thee this day, to love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and to walk ever in his ways; <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>then shalt thou add three cities more for thee, beside these three:
<span class="verse" id="DT19_10">10&#160;</span> That innocent blood be not shed in thy land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance, and <span class='add'>so</span> blood be upon thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT19_11">11&#160;</span>¶ But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mortally that he die, and fleeth into one of these cities:
<span class="verse" id="DT19_12">12&#160;</span> Then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.
<span class="verse" id="DT19_13">13&#160;</span> Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shalt put away <span class='add'>the guilt of</span> innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT19_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour’s landmark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee to possess it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT19_15">15&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT19_16">16&#160;</span>¶ If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>that which is</span> wrong;
<span class="verse" id="DT19_17">17&#160;</span> Then both the men, between whom the controversy <span class='add'>is</span>, shall stand before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, before the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days;
<span class="verse" id="DT19_18">18&#160;</span> And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the witness <span class='add'>be</span> a false witness, <span class='add'>and</span> hath testified falsely against his brother;
<span class="verse" id="DT19_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you.
<span class="verse" id="DT19_20">20&#160;</span> And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.
<span class="verse" id="DT19_21">21&#160;</span> And thine eye shall not pity; <span class='add'>but</span> <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>life <span class='add'>shall go</span> for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT20_1">1&#160;</span> When thou goest out to battle against thine enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, <span class='add'>and</span> a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> with thee, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_2">2&#160;</span> And it shall be, when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak unto the people,
<span class="verse" id="DT20_3">3&#160;</span> And shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye approach this day unto battle against your enemies: let not your hearts <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>faint, fear not, and do not <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them;
<span class="verse" id="DT20_4">4&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>is</span> he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT20_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the officers shall speak unto the people, saying, What man <span class='add'>is there</span> that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_6">6&#160;</span> And what man <span class='add'>is he</span> that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not <span class='add'>yet</span> <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>eaten of it? let him <span class='add'>also</span> go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And what man <span class='add'>is there</span> that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the battle, and another man take her.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_8">8&#160;</span> And the officers shall speak further unto the people, and they shall say, <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>What man <span class='add'>is there that is</span> fearful and fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren’s heart <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>faint as well as his heart.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking unto the people, that they shall make captains of the armies <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to lead the people.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT20_10">10&#160;</span>¶ When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_11">11&#160;</span> And it shall be, if it make thee answer of peace, and open unto thee, then it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> all the people <span class='add'>that is</span> found therein shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_12">12&#160;</span> And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shalt besiege it:
<span class="verse" id="DT20_13">13&#160;</span> And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword:
<span class="verse" id="DT20_14">14&#160;</span> But the women, and the little ones, and <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the cattle, and all that is in the city, <span class='add'>even</span> all the spoil thereof, shalt thou <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath given thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_15">15&#160;</span> Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities <span class='add'>which are</span> very far off from thee, which <span class='add'>are</span> not of the cities of these nations.
<span class="verse" id="DT20_16">16&#160;</span> But of the cities of these people, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God doth give thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:
<span class="verse" id="DT20_17">17&#160;</span> But thou shalt utterly destroy them; <span class='add'>namely</span>, the Hittites, and the Amorites, the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath commanded thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT20_18">18&#160;</span> That they teach you not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT20_19">19&#160;</span>¶ When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down (<a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for the tree of the field <span class='add'>is</span> man’s <span class='add'>life</span>) <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to employ <span class='add'>them</span> in the siege:
<span class="verse" id="DT20_20">20&#160;</span> Only the trees which thou knowest that they <span class='add'>be</span> not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee, until <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it be subdued.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT21_1">1&#160;</span>If <span class='add'>one</span> be found slain in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee to possess it, lying in the field, <span class='add'>and</span> it be not known who hath slain him:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_2">2&#160;</span> Then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which <span class='add'>are</span> round about him that is slain:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_3">3&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> the city <span class='add'>which is</span> next unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take an heifer, which hath not been wrought with, <span class='add'>and</span> which hath not drawn in the yoke;
<span class="verse" id="DT21_4">4&#160;</span> And the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough valley, which is neither eared nor sown, and shall strike off the heifer’s neck there in the valley:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_5">5&#160;</span> And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near; for them the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and by their <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>word shall every controversy and every stroke be <span class='add'>tried:</span>
<span class="verse" id="DT21_6">6&#160;</span> And all the elders of that city, <span class='add'>that are</span> next unto the slain <span class='add'>man</span>, shall wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the valley:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_7">7&#160;</span> And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT21_8">8&#160;</span> Be merciful, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unto thy people of Israel’s charge. And the blood shall be forgiven them.
<span class="verse" id="DT21_9">9&#160;</span> So shalt thou put away the <span class='add'>guilt of</span> innocent blood from among you, when thou shalt do <span class='add'>that which is</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT21_10">10&#160;</span>¶ When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive,
<span class="verse" id="DT21_11">11&#160;</span> And seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife;
<span class="verse" id="DT21_12">12&#160;</span> Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house; and she shall shave her head, and <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pare her nails;
<span class="verse" id="DT21_13">13&#160;</span> And she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.
<span class="verse" id="DT21_14">14&#160;</span> And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but thou shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT21_15">15&#160;</span>¶ If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have born him children, <span class='add'>both</span> the beloved and the hated; and <span class='add'>if</span> the firstborn son be hers that was hated:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_16">16&#160;</span> Then it shall be, when he maketh his sons to inherit <span class='add'>that</span> which he hath, <span class='add'>that</span> he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, <span class='add'>which is indeed</span> the firstborn:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_17">17&#160;</span> But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated <span class='add'>for</span> the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of all <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that he hath: for he <span class='add'>is</span> the beginning of his strength; the right of the firstborn <span class='add'>is</span> his.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT21_18">18&#160;</span>¶ If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and <span class='add'>that</span>, when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_19">19&#160;</span> Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place;
<span class="verse" id="DT21_20">20&#160;</span> And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son <span class='add'>is</span> stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice; <span class='add'>he is</span> a glutton, and a drunkard.
<span class="verse" id="DT21_21">21&#160;</span> And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and all Israel shall hear, and fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT21_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And if a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree:
<span class="verse" id="DT21_23">23&#160;</span> His body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day; (for <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he that is hanged <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>accursed of God;) that thy land be not defiled, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_1">1&#160;</span> Thou <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shalt not see thy brother’s ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy brother.
<span class="verse" id="DT22_2">2&#160;</span> And if thy brother <span class='add'>be</span> not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt restore it to him again.
<span class="verse" id="DT22_3">3&#160;</span> In like manner shalt thou do with his ass; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with all lost thing of thy brother’s, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not see thy brother’s ass or his ox fall down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift <span class='add'>them</span> up again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_5">5&#160;</span>¶ The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shall a man put on a woman’s garment: for all that do so <span class='add'>are</span> abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_6">6&#160;</span>¶ If a bird’s nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree, or on the ground, <span class='add'>whether they be</span> young ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the dam with the young:
<span class="verse" id="DT22_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and take the young to thee; that it may be well with thee, and <span class='add'>that</span> thou mayest prolong <span class='add'>thy</span> days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_8">8&#160;</span>¶ When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thine house, if any man fall from thence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers seeds: lest the <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fruit of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an ass together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, <span class='add'>as</span> of woollen and linen together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt make thee <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fringes upon the four <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest <span class='add'>thyself</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_13">13&#160;</span>¶ If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her,
<span class="verse" id="DT22_14">14&#160;</span> And give occasions of speech against her, and bring up an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid:
<span class="verse" id="DT22_15">15&#160;</span> Then shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth <span class='add'>the tokens of</span> the damsel’s virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate:
<span class="verse" id="DT22_16">16&#160;</span> And the damsel’s father shall say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her;
<span class="verse" id="DT22_17">17&#160;</span> And, lo, he hath given occasions of speech <span class='add'>against her</span>, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these <span class='add'>are the tokens of</span> my daughter’s virginity. And they shall spread the cloth before the elders of the city.
<span class="verse" id="DT22_18">18&#160;</span> And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise him;
<span class="verse" id="DT22_19">19&#160;</span> And they shall amerce him in an hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver, and give <span class='add'>them</span> unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days.
<span class="verse" id="DT22_20">20&#160;</span> But if this thing be true, <span class='add'>and the tokens of</span> virginity be not found for the damsel:
<span class="verse" id="DT22_21">21&#160;</span> Then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of her father’s house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly in Israel, to play the whore in her father’s house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If a man be found lying with a woman married to an husband, then they shall both of them die, <span class='add'>both</span> the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_23">23&#160;</span>¶ If a damsel <span class='add'>that is</span> a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her;
<span class="verse" id="DT22_24">24&#160;</span> Then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, <span class='add'>being</span> in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour’s wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_25">25&#160;</span>¶ But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shall die:
<span class="verse" id="DT22_26">26&#160;</span> But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; <span class='add'>there is</span> in the damsel no sin <span class='add'>worthy</span> of death: for as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so <span class='add'>is</span> this matter:
<span class="verse" id="DT22_27">27&#160;</span> For he found her in the field, <span class='add'>and</span> the betrothed damsel cried, and <span class='add'>there was</span> none to save her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_28">28&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If a man find a damsel <span class='add'>that is</span> a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found;
<span class="verse" id="DT22_29">29&#160;</span> Then the man that lay with her shall give unto the damsel’s father fifty <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver, and she shall be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away all his days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT22_30">30&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A man shall not take his father’s wife, nor discover his father’s skirt.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_1">1&#160;</span> He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut off, shall not enter into the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_2">2&#160;</span> A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for ever:
<span class="verse" id="DT23_4">4&#160;</span> Because they met you not with bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_5">5&#160;</span> Nevertheless the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God would not hearken unto Balaam; but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God loved thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_6">6&#160;</span> Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prosperity all thy days for ever.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he <span class='add'>is</span> thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_8">8&#160;</span> The children that are begotten of them shall enter into the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in their third generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_9">9&#160;</span>¶ When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_10">10&#160;</span>¶ If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleanness that chanceth him by night, then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp:
<span class="verse" id="DT23_11">11&#160;</span> But it shall be, when evening <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cometh on, he shall wash <span class='add'>himself</span> with water: and when the sun is down, he shall come into the camp <span class='add'>again</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad:
<span class="verse" id="DT23_13">13&#160;</span> And thou shalt have a paddle upon thy weapon; and it shall be, when thou <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT23_14">14&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy: that he see no <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master unto thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT23_16">16&#160;</span> He shall dwell with thee, <span class='add'>even</span> among you, in that place which he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>liketh him best: thou shalt not oppress him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_17">17&#160;</span>¶ There shall be no <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_18">18&#160;</span> Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God for any vow: for even both these <span class='add'>are</span> abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_19">19&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury:
<span class="verse" id="DT23_20">20&#160;</span> Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to possess it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_21">21&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When thou shalt vow a vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be sin in thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_22">22&#160;</span> But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_23">23&#160;</span> That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt keep and perform; <span class='add'>even</span> a freewill offering, according as thou hast vowed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT23_24">24&#160;</span>¶ When thou comest into thy neighbour’s vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put <span class='add'>any</span> in thy vessel.
<span class="verse" id="DT23_25">25&#160;</span> When thou comest into the standing corn of thy <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>neighbour, <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour’s standing corn.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_1">1&#160;</span> When a <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>some uncleanness in her: then let him write her a bill of <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>divorcement, and give <span class='add'>it</span> in her hand, and send her out of his house.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_2">2&#160;</span> And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man’s <span class='add'>wife</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_3">3&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>if</span> the latter husband hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, and giveth <span class='add'>it</span> in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the latter husband die, which took her <span class='add'>to be</span> his wife;
<span class="verse" id="DT24_4">4&#160;</span> Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that <span class='add'>is</span> abomination before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>neither shall he be charged with any business: <span class='add'>but</span> he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_6">6&#160;</span>¶ No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh <span class='add'>a man’s</span> life to pledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_7">7&#160;</span>¶ If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him; then that thief shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Take heed in the <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them, <span class='add'>so</span> ye shall observe to do.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_9">9&#160;</span> Remember what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God did <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_10">10&#160;</span>¶ When thou dost <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_11">11&#160;</span> Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shall bring out the pledge abroad unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_12">12&#160;</span> And if the man <span class='add'>be</span> poor, thou shalt not sleep with his pledge:
<span class="verse" id="DT24_13">13&#160;</span> In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee: and it shall be righteousness unto thee before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not oppress an hired servant <span class='add'>that is</span> poor and needy, <span class='add'>whether he be</span> of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that <span class='add'>are</span> in thy land within thy gates:
<span class="verse" id="DT24_15">15&#160;</span> At his day <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt give <span class='add'>him</span> his hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he <span class='add'>is</span> poor, and <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>setteth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thee unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and it be sin unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shall be put to death for his own sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, <span class='add'>nor</span> of the fatherless; nor take a widow’s raiment to pledge:
<span class="verse" id="DT24_18">18&#160;</span> But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God redeemed thee thence: therefore I command thee to do this thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT24_19">19&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow: that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God may bless thee in all the work of thine hands.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_20">20&#160;</span> When thou beatest thine olive tree, <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_21">21&#160;</span> When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean <span class='add'>it</span> <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>afterward: it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
<span class="verse" id="DT24_22">22&#160;</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to do this thing.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT25_1">1&#160;</span> If there be a controversy between men, and they come unto judgment, that <span class='add'>the judges</span> may judge them; then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_2">2&#160;</span> And it shall be, if the wicked man <span class='add'>be</span> worthy to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Forty stripes he may give him, <span class='add'>and</span> not exceed: lest, <span class='add'>if</span> he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT25_4">4&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>treadeth out <span class='add'>the corn</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT25_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry without unto a stranger: her <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>husband’s brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband’s brother unto her.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_6">6&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> the firstborn which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother <span class='add'>which is</span> dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_7">7&#160;</span> And if the man like not to take his <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brother’s wife, then let his brother’s wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My husband’s brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband’s brother.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_8">8&#160;</span> Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak unto him: and <span class='add'>if</span> he stand <span class='add'>to it</span>, and say, I like not to take her;
<span class="verse" id="DT25_9">9&#160;</span> Then shall his brother’s wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother’s house.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_10">10&#160;</span> And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe loosed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT25_11">11&#160;</span>¶ When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smiteth him, and putteth forth her hand, and taketh him by the secrets:
<span class="verse" id="DT25_12">12&#160;</span> Then thou shalt cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity <span class='add'>her</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT25_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not have in thy bag <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>divers weights, a great and a small.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt not have in thine house <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>divers measures, a great and a small.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_16">16&#160;</span> For all that do such things, <span class='add'>and</span> all that do unrighteously, <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT25_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth out of Egypt;
<span class="verse" id="DT25_18">18&#160;</span> How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, <span class='add'>even</span> all <span class='add'>that were</span> feeble behind thee, when thou <span class='add'>wast</span> faint and weary; and he feared not God.
<span class="verse" id="DT25_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore it shall be, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance to possess it, <span class='add'>that</span> thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not forget <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT26_1">1&#160;</span>And it shall be, when thou <span class='add'>art</span> come in unto the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy God giveth thee <span class='add'>for</span> an inheritance, and possessest it, and dwellest therein;
<span class="verse" id="DT26_2">2&#160;</span> That thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, and shalt put <span class='add'>it</span> in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall choose to place his name there.
<span class="verse" id="DT26_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt go unto the priest that shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess this day unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, that I am come unto the country which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto our fathers for to give us.
<span class="verse" id="DT26_4">4&#160;</span> And the priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT26_5">5&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak and say before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, A Syrian ready to perish <span class='add'>was</span> my father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous:
<span class="verse" id="DT26_6">6&#160;</span> And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage:
<span class="verse" id="DT26_7">7&#160;</span> And when we cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of our fathers, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heard our voice, and looked on our affliction, and our labour, and our oppression:
<span class="verse" id="DT26_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders:
<span class="verse" id="DT26_9">9&#160;</span> And he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, <span class='add'>even</span> a land that floweth with milk and honey.
<span class="verse" id="DT26_10">10&#160;</span> And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and worship before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God:
<span class="verse" id="DT26_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt rejoice in every good <span class='add'>thing</span> which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT26_12">12&#160;</span>¶ When thou hast made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine increase the third year, <span class='add'>which is</span> <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the year of tithing, and hast given <span class='add'>it</span> unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled;
<span class="verse" id="DT26_13">13&#160;</span> Then thou shalt say before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of <span class='add'>mine</span> house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy commandments which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten <span class='add'>them:</span>
<span class="verse" id="DT26_14">14&#160;</span> I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away <span class='add'>ought</span> thereof for <span class='add'>any</span> unclean <span class='add'>use</span>, nor given <span class='add'>ought</span> thereof for the dead: <span class='add'>but</span> I have hearkened to the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, <span class='add'>and</span> have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.
<span class="verse" id="DT26_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT26_16">16&#160;</span>¶ This day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.
<span class="verse" id="DT26_17">17&#160;</span> Thou hast avouched the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice:
<span class="verse" id="DT26_18">18&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that <span class='add'>thou</span> shouldest keep all his commandments;
<span class="verse" id="DT26_19">19&#160;</span> And to make thee high above all nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, as he hath spoken.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT27_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandments which I command you this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_2">2&#160;</span> And it shall be on the day <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when ye shall pass over Jordan unto the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaister them with plaister:
<span class="verse" id="DT27_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art passed over, that thou mayest go in unto the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of thy fathers hath promised thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore it shall be when ye be gone over Jordan, <span class='add'>that</span> ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaister them with plaister.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_5">5&#160;</span> And there shalt thou build an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, an altar of stones: <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt not lift up <span class='add'>any</span> iron <span class='add'>tool</span> upon them.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_6">6&#160;</span> Thou shalt build the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God of whole stones: and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God:
<span class="verse" id="DT27_7">7&#160;</span> And thou shalt offer peace offerings, and shalt eat there, and rejoice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT27_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel, saying, Take heed, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_10">10&#160;</span> Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT27_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT27_12">12&#160;</span> These shall stand upon mount Gerizim to bless the people, when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin:
<span class="verse" id="DT27_13">13&#160;</span> And these shall stand upon mount Ebal <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT27_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice,
<span class="verse" id="DT27_15">15&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man that maketh <span class='add'>any</span> graven or molten image, an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and putteth <span class='add'>it</span> in <span class='add'>a</span> secret <span class='add'>place</span>. And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_16">16&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that setteth light by his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_17">17&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that removeth his neighbour’s landmark. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_18">18&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_19">19&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_20">20&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that lieth with his father’s wife; because he uncovereth his father’s skirt. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_21">21&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that lieth with any manner of beast. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_22">22&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_23">23&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that lieth with his mother in law. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_24">24&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person. And all the people shall say, Amen.
<span class="verse" id="DT27_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that confirmeth not <span class='add'>all</span> the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Amen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT28_1">1&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to observe <span class='add'>and</span> to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_2">2&#160;</span> And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_3">3&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> in the city, and blessed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> in the field.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_4">4&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>shall be</span> the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_5">5&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>shall be</span> thy basket and thy <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>store.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_6">6&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> when thou comest in, and blessed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> when thou goest out.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_7">7&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_8">8&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall command the blessing upon thee in thy <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>storehouses, and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_9">9&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and walk in his ways.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_10">10&#160;</span> And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they shall be afraid of thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_11">11&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall make thee plenteous <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in goods, in the fruit of thy <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto thy fathers to give thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_12">12&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: and <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do <span class='add'>them:</span>
<span class="verse" id="DT28_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, <span class='add'>to</span> the right hand, or <span class='add'>to</span> the left, to go after other gods to serve them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT28_15">15&#160;</span>¶ But it shall come to pass, <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_16">16&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> in the city, and cursed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> in the field.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_17">17&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>shall be</span> thy basket and thy store.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_18">18&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>shall be</span> the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_19">19&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> when thou comest in, and cursed <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> when thou goest out.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_20">20&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all that thou settest thine hand unto <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_21">21&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land, whither thou goest to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall smite thee with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning, and with the <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_23">23&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy heaven that <span class='add'>is</span> over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee <span class='add'>shall be</span> iron.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_24">24&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them: and shalt be <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_26">26&#160;</span> And thy carcase shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shall fray <span class='add'>them</span> away.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_27">27&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_28">28&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_29">29&#160;</span> And thou shalt grope at <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>noonday, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore, and no man shall save <span class='add'>thee</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_30">30&#160;</span> Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her: thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dwell therein: <a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gather the grapes thereof.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_31">31&#160;</span> Thine ox <span class='add'>shall be</span> slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine ass <span class='add'>shall be</span> violently taken away from before thy face, and <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall not be restored to thee: thy sheep <span class='add'>shall be</span> given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_32">32&#160;</span> Thy sons and thy daughters <span class='add'>shall be</span> given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and fail <span class='add'>with longing</span> for them all the day long: and <span class='add'>there shall be</span> no might in thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_33">33&#160;</span> The fruit of thy land, and all thy labours, shall a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oppressed and crushed alway:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_34">34&#160;</span> So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_35">35&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore botch that cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_36">36&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and stone.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_37">37&#160;</span> And thou shalt become <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all nations whither the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall lead thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt carry much seed out into the field, and shalt gather <span class='add'>but</span> little in; for the locust shall consume it.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_39">39&#160;</span> Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress <span class='add'>them</span>, but shalt neither drink <span class='add'>of</span> the wine, nor gather <span class='add'>the grapes;</span> for the worms shall eat them.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_40">40&#160;</span> Thou shalt have olive trees throughout all thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint <span class='add'>thyself</span> with the oil; for thine olive shall cast <span class='add'>his fruit</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_41">41&#160;</span> Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou shalt not enjoy them; for they shall go into captivity.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_42">42&#160;</span> All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>locust <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>consume.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_43">43&#160;</span> The stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> within thee shall get up above thee very high; and thou shalt come down very low.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_44">44&#160;</span> He shall lend to thee, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT28_45">45&#160;</span> Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_46">46&#160;</span> And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_47">47&#160;</span> Because thou servedst not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all <span class='add'>things;</span>
<span class="verse" id="DT28_48">48&#160;</span> Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all <span class='add'>things:</span> and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_49">49&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, <span class='add'>as swift</span> as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understand;
<span class="verse" id="DT28_50">50&#160;</span> A nation <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of fierce countenance, which shall not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_51">51&#160;</span> And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which <span class='add'>also</span> shall not leave thee <span class='add'>either</span> corn, wine, or oil, <span class='add'>or</span> the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_52">52&#160;</span> And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout all thy land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath given thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_53">53&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath given thee, in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_54">54&#160;</span> <span class='add'>So that</span> the man <span class='add'>that is</span> tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shall leave:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_55">55&#160;</span> So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shall eat: because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_56">56&#160;</span> The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,
<span class="verse" id="DT28_57">57&#160;</span> And toward her <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>young one that cometh out from between her feet, and toward her children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them for want of all <span class='add'>things</span> secretly in the siege and straitness, wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_58">58&#160;</span> If thou wilt not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, THE <span class='nd'>LORD</span> THY GOD;
<span class="verse" id="DT28_59">59&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, <span class='add'>even</span> great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_60">60&#160;</span> Moreover he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shall cleave unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_61">61&#160;</span> Also every sickness, and every plague, which <span class='add'>is</span> not written in the book of this law, them will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_62">62&#160;</span> And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_63">63&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_64">64&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, <span class='add'>even</span> wood and stone.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_65">65&#160;</span> And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole of thy foot have rest: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_66">66&#160;</span> And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none assurance of thy life:
<span class="verse" id="DT28_67">67&#160;</span> In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.
<span class="verse" id="DT28_68">68&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou shalt see it no more again: and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shall buy <span class='add'>you</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT29_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the words of the covenant, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT29_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And Moses called unto all Israel, and said unto them, <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ye have seen all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto all his servants, and unto all his land;
<span class="verse" id="DT29_3">3&#160;</span> The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great miracles:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_4">4&#160;</span> Yet the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_5">5&#160;</span> And I have led you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_6">6&#160;</span> Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink: that ye might know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_7">7&#160;</span> And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto battle, and we smote them:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_8">8&#160;</span> And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT29_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Ye stand this day all of you before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your officers, <span class='add'>with</span> all the men of Israel,
<span class="verse" id="DT29_11">11&#160;</span> Your little ones, your wives, and thy stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_12">12&#160;</span> That thou shouldest <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>enter into covenant with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and into his oath, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God maketh with thee this day:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_13">13&#160;</span> That he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself, and <span class='add'>that</span> he may be unto thee a God, as he hath said unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_14">14&#160;</span> Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath;
<span class="verse" id="DT29_15">15&#160;</span>But with <span class='add'>him</span> that standeth here with us this day before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, and also with <span class='add'>him</span> that <span class='add'>is</span> not here with us this day:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_16">16&#160;</span>(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came through the nations which ye passed by;
<span class="verse" id="DT29_17">17&#160;</span> And ye have seen their abominations, and their <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which <span class='add'>were</span> among them:)
<span class="verse" id="DT29_18">18&#160;</span> Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, to go <span class='add'>and</span> serve the gods of these nations; lest there should be among you a root that beareth <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gall and wormwood;
<span class="verse" id="DT29_19">19&#160;</span> And it come to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>imagination of mine heart, to add <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>drunkenness to thirst:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_20">20&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not spare him, but then the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall blot out his name from under heaven.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are written in this book of the law:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_22">22&#160;</span> So that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and the sicknesses <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath laid upon it;<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="DT29_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And that</span> the whole land thereof <span class='add'>is</span> brimstone, and salt, <span class='add'>and</span> burning, <span class='add'>that</span> it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>like the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_24">24&#160;</span> Even all nations shall say, <a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Wherefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> done thus unto this land? what <span class='add'>meaneth</span> the heat of this great anger?
<span class="verse" id="DT29_25">25&#160;</span> Then men shall say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_26">26&#160;</span> For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>whom</span> he had not <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>given unto them:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_27">27&#160;</span> And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book:
<span class="verse" id="DT29_28">28&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rooted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT29_29">29&#160;</span> The secret <span class='add'>things belong</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God: but those <span class='add'>things which are</span> revealed <span class='add'>belong</span> unto us and to our children for ever, that <span class='add'>we</span> may do all the words of this law.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT30_1">1&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shalt call <span class='add'>them</span> to mind among all the nations, whither the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath driven thee,
<span class="verse" id="DT30_2">2&#160;</span> And shalt return unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and shalt obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;
<span class="verse" id="DT30_3">3&#160;</span> That then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the nations, whither the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath scattered thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If <span class='add'>any</span> of thine be driven out unto the outmost <span class='add'>parts</span> of heaven, from thence will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee:
<span class="verse" id="DT30_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers:
<span class="verse" id="DT30_10">10&#160;</span> If thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the law, <span class='add'>and</span> if thou turn unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT30_11">11&#160;</span>¶ For this commandment which I command thee this day, it <span class='add'>is</span> not hidden from thee, neither <span class='add'>is</span> it far off.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>It <span class='add'>is</span> not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
<span class="verse" id="DT30_13">13&#160;</span>Neither <span class='add'>is</span> it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it?
<span class="verse" id="DT30_14">14&#160;</span> But the word <span class='add'>is</span> very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT30_15">15&#160;</span>¶ See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil;
<span class="verse" id="DT30_16">16&#160;</span> In that I command thee this day to love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_17">17&#160;</span> But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them;
<span class="verse" id="DT30_18">18&#160;</span> I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, <span class='add'>and that</span> ye shall not prolong <span class='add'>your</span> days upon the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT30_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, <span class='add'>that</span> I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live:
<span class="verse" id="DT30_20">20&#160;</span> That thou mayest love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, <span class='add'>and</span> that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he <span class='add'>is</span> thy life, and the length of thy days: that thou mayest dwell in the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses went and spake these words unto all Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_2">2&#160;</span> And he said unto them, I <span class='add'>am</span> an hundred and twenty years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: also the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said unto me, <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, he will go over before thee, <span class='add'>and</span> he will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shalt possess them: <span class='add'>and</span> Joshua, he shall go over before thee, <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_5">5&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall give them up before your face, that ye may do unto them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded you.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_6">6&#160;</span> Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, he <span class='add'>it is</span> that doth go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with this people unto the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sworn unto their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he <span class='add'>it is</span> that doth go before thee; he will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither be dismayed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and unto all the elders of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_10">10&#160;</span> And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of <span class='add'>every</span> seven years, in the solemnity of the <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
<span class="verse" id="DT31_11">11&#160;</span> When all Israel is come to appear before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_12">12&#160;</span> Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and thy stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and observe to do all the words of this law:
<span class="verse" id="DT31_13">13&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> their children, which have not known <span class='add'>any thing</span>, may hear, and learn to fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud: and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land, whither they go <span class='add'>to be</span> among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_17">17&#160;</span> Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>befall them; so that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our God <span class='add'>is</span> not among us?
<span class="verse" id="DT31_18">18&#160;</span> And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are turned unto other gods.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_19">19&#160;</span> Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_20">20&#160;</span> For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my covenant.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_21">21&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are befallen them, that this song shall testify <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>against them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I know their imagination which they <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>go about, even now, before I have brought them into the land which I sware.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_23">23&#160;</span> And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be strong and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were finished,
<span class="verse" id="DT31_25">25&#160;</span> That Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT31_26">26&#160;</span> Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_27">27&#160;</span> For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and how much more after my death? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT31_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Gather unto me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_29">29&#160;</span> For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt <span class='add'>yourselves</span>, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you; and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.
<span class="verse" id="DT31_30">30&#160;</span> And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were ended.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_1">1&#160;</span> Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_2">2&#160;</span> My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_3">3&#160;</span> Because I will publish the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: ascribe ye greatness unto our God.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He is</span> the Rock, his work <span class='add'>is</span> perfect: for all his ways <span class='add'>are</span> judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> They have corrupted themselves, <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>their spot <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>the spot</span> of his children: <span class='add'>they are</span> a perverse and crooked generation.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_6">6&#160;</span> Do ye thus requite the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O foolish people and unwise? <span class='add'>is</span> not he thy father <span class='add'>that</span> hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and established thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Remember the days of old, consider the years of <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_8">8&#160;</span> When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_9">9&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> portion <span class='add'>is</span> his people; Jacob <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lot of his inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_10">10&#160;</span> He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness; he <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_11">11&#160;</span> As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>So</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> alone did lead him, and <span class='add'>there was</span> no strange god with him.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_13">13&#160;</span> He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock;
<span class="verse" id="DT32_14">14&#160;</span> Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_15">15&#160;</span>¶ But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered <span class='add'>with fatness;</span> then he forsook God <span class='add'>which</span> made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_16">16&#160;</span> They provoked him to jealousy with strange <span class='add'>gods</span>, with abominations provoked they him to anger.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_17">17&#160;</span> They sacrificed unto devils, <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new <span class='add'>gods that</span> came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_18">18&#160;</span> Of the Rock <span class='add'>that</span> begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_19">19&#160;</span> And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saw <span class='add'>it</span>, he <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abhorred <span class='add'>them</span>, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_20">20&#160;</span> And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end <span class='add'>shall be:</span> for they <span class='add'>are</span> a very froward generation, children in whom <span class='add'>is</span> no faith.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_21">21&#160;</span> They have moved me to jealousy with <span class='add'>that which is</span> not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will move them to jealousy with <span class='add'>those which are</span> not a people; I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_22">22&#160;</span> For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and <a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall burn unto the lowest hell, and <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_23">23&#160;</span> I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon them.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They shall be</span> burnt with hunger, and devoured with <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>burning heat, and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_25">25&#160;</span> The sword without, and terror <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>within, shall <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling <span class='add'>also</span> with the man of gray hairs.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_26">26&#160;</span> I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_27">27&#160;</span> Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, <span class='add'>and</span> lest they should say, <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Our hand <span class='add'>is</span> high, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not done all this.<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_28">28&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>are</span> a nation void of counsel, neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> understanding in them.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_29">29&#160;</span> O that they were wise, <span class='add'>that</span> they understood this, <span class='add'>that</span> they would consider their latter end!
<span class="verse" id="DT32_30">30&#160;</span> How should <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had shut them up?
<span class="verse" id="DT32_31">31&#160;</span> For their rock <span class='add'>is</span> not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves <span class='add'>being</span> judges.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_32">32&#160;</span> For their vine <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>is</span> of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes <span class='add'>are</span> grapes of gall, their clusters <span class='add'>are</span> bitter:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_33">33&#160;</span> Their wine <span class='add'>is</span> the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not this laid up in store with me, <span class='add'>and</span> sealed up among my treasures?
<span class="verse" id="DT32_35">35&#160;</span>To me <span class='add'>belongeth</span> <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>vengeance, and recompence; their foot shall slide in <span class='add'>due</span> time: for the day of their calamity <span class='add'>is</span> at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make haste.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_36">36&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he seeth that <span class='add'>their</span> <a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>power is gone, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none shut up, or left.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_37">37&#160;</span> And he shall say, Where <span class='add'>are</span> their gods, <span class='add'>their</span> rock in whom they trusted,
<span class="verse" id="DT32_38">38&#160;</span> Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, <span class='add'>and</span> drank the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, <span class='add'>and</span> be <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>your protection.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_39">39&#160;</span> See now that I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, <span class='add'>am</span> he, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no god with me: <a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> that can deliver out of my hand.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_40">40&#160;</span> For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_41">41&#160;</span> If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_42">42&#160;</span> I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh; <span class='add'>and that</span> with the blood of the slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Rejoice, O ye nations, <span class='add'>with</span> his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, <span class='add'>and</span> to his people.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT32_44">44&#160;</span>¶ And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he, and <a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hoshea the son of Nun.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_45">45&#160;</span> And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_46">46&#160;</span> And he said unto them, <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Set your hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to observe to do, all the words of this law.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_47">47&#160;</span>For it <span class='add'>is</span> not a vain thing for you; because it <span class='add'>is</span> your life: and through this thing ye shall prolong <span class='add'>your</span> days in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_48">48&#160;</span><a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying,
<span class="verse" id="DT32_49">49&#160;</span> Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, <span class='add'>unto</span> mount Nebo, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Moab, that <span class='add'>is</span> over against Jericho; and behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_50">50&#160;</span> And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people:
<span class="verse" id="DT32_51">51&#160;</span> Because <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of <a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Meribah-Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="DT32_52">52&#160;</span> Yet thou shalt see the land before <span class='add'>thee;</span> but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_1">1&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand <span class='add'>went</span> <a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a fiery law for them.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_3">3&#160;</span> Yea, he loved the people; all his saints <span class='add'>are</span> in thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet; <span class='add'>every one</span> shall receive of thy words.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_4">4&#160;</span> Moses commanded us a law, <span class='add'>even</span> the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_5">5&#160;</span> And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people <span class='add'>and</span> the tribes of Israel were gathered together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Let Reuben live, and not die; and let <span class='add'>not</span> his men be few. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is the blessing</span> of Judah: and he said, Hear, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient for him; and be thou an help <span class='add'>to him</span> from his enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And of Levi he said, <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>Let</span> thy Thummim and thy Urim <span class='add'>be</span> with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, <span class='add'>and with</span> whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;
<span class="verse" id="DT33_9">9&#160;</span> Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>they shall put incense <a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_11">11&#160;</span> Bless, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall dwell in safety by him; <span class='add'>and the <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And of Joseph he said, <a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Blessed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth beneath,
<span class="verse" id="DT33_14">14&#160;</span> And for the precious fruits <span class='add'>brought forth</span> by the sun, and for the precious things <a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>put forth by the <a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>moon,
<span class="verse" id="DT33_15">15&#160;</span> And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hills,
<span class="verse" id="DT33_16">16&#160;</span> And for the precious things of the earth and fulness thereof, and <span class='add'>for</span> the good will of him that dwelt in the bush: let <span class='add'>the blessing</span> come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him <span class='add'>that was</span> <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>separated from his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_17">17&#160;</span> His glory <span class='add'>is like</span> the firstling of his bullock, and his horns <span class='add'>are like</span> the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they <span class='add'>are</span> the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they <span class='add'>are</span> the thousands of Manasseh.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Issachar, in thy tents.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_19">19&#160;</span> They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck <span class='add'>of</span> the abundance of the seas, and <span class='add'>of</span> treasures hid in the sand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And of Gad he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> he that enlargeth Gad: he dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_21">21&#160;</span> And he provided the first part for himself, because there, <span class='add'>in</span> a portion of the lawgiver, <span class='add'>was he</span> <a href='#FN408' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his judgments with Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And of Dan he said, Dan <span class='add'>is</span> a lion’s whelp: he shall leap from Bashan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: possess thou the west and the south. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And of Asher he said, <span class='add'>Let</span> Asher <span class='add'>be</span> blessed with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Thy shoes <span class='add'>shall be</span> iron and brass; and as thy days, <span class='add'>so shall</span> thy strength <span class='add'>be</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT33_26">26&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>There is</span> none like unto the God of Jeshurun, <span class='add'>who</span> rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_27">27&#160;</span> The eternal God <span class='add'>is thy</span> refuge, and underneath <span class='add'>are</span> the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say, Destroy <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew.
<span class="verse" id="DT33_29">29&#160;</span> Happy <span class='add'>art</span> thou, O Israel: who <span class='add'>is</span> like unto thee, O people saved by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the shield of thy help, and who <span class='add'>is</span> the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies <a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall be found liars unto thee; and thou shalt tread upon their high places.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='DT34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT34_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of <a href='#FN412' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Pisgah, that <span class='add'>is</span> over against Jericho. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shewed him <a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the land of Gilead, unto Dan,
<span class="verse" id="DT34_2">2&#160;</span> And all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the utmost sea,
<span class="verse" id="DT34_3">3&#160;</span> And the south, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar.
<span class="verse" id="DT34_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, <a href='#FN414' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>This <span class='add'>is</span> the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy seed: I have caused thee to see <span class='add'>it</span> with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT34_5">5&#160;</span>¶ So Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="DT34_6">6&#160;</span> And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT34_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Moses <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his <a href='#FN415' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>natural force <a href='#FN416' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abated.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT34_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of weeping <span class='add'>and</span> mourning for Moses were ended. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT34_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="DT34_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> knew face to face,
<span class="verse" id="DT34_11">11&#160;</span> In all the signs and the wonders, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
<span class="verse" id="DT34_12">12&#160;</span> And in all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed in the sight of all Israel. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Zuph.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_24'>21. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all his neighbours.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. given.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>15. 18</a>. &amp;c 17. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_7'>7</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gave.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_24'>7. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_15'>19. 15</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_19'>16. 19</a>. 1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_7'>16. 7</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_23'>24. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. acknowledge faces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Num <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_3'>13. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_24'>13. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb melted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_29'>13 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_29'>14. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fulfilled to go after.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_12'>20 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_14'>27. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.37</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_26'>3. 26</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_21'>4. 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_4'>34. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_40'>14. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT1_43"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ye were presumptuous, and went up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. even to the treading of the sole of the foot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN36_8'>36. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Use no hostility against Moab.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN36_20'>36. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. inherited them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, room</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_12'>21. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valley.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. begin, possess.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Num 21 <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_21'>21</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_23'>21. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT2_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. every city of men, and women, and little ones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_33'>21. 33</a>, &amp;c. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_7'>29. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_24'>21. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_33'>21. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_33'>32. 33</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_8'>13. 8</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_41'>32. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, under the springs of Pisgah, or, the hill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_20'>32. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sons of power.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS22_4'>22. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_18'>27. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_12'>20. 12</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_37'>1. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT3_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The hill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_32'>12 32</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_7'>1. 7</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_6'>30. 6</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_18'>22. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Num <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_4'>25. 4</a>, &amp;c</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_18'>19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. save a voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, imparted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_3'>9. 3</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_29'>12. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 shalt]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. have found thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_32"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.32</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS20_8'>20. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_24'>21. 24</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_4'>1 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_33'>21. 33</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_49"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.49</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 of]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT4_49"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.49</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_17'>3. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. keep to do them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_5'>19. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_2'>20. 2</a>. &amp;c. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_1'>26. 1</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS81_10'>81. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX84_7'>84. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_18'>32. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_2'>2. 2</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_4'>4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_21'>5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_20'>18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_9'>13. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_7'>7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_19'>19. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_33'>4. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. add to hear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_19'>20. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT5_29"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5.29</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits all]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pass over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_12'>10 12</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_37'>22. 37</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_30'>12. 30</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_27'>10. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_18'>11. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. whet, or, sharpen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 8. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_9'>9</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_10'>10</a>, &amp;c</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb bondmen, or, servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 10. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_12'>12</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_20'>20</a> &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_4'>13. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_7'>4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_2'>17 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to morrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT6_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. evil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT31_3'>31. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_32'>23. 32</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_12'>34. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. statues, or, pillars</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_2'>14. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_19'>26. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_5'>19. 5</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_9'>2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. because.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_26'>23. 26</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_14'>9. 14</a> &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_26'>15. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_33'>23. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_28'>23. 28</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_12'>24. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pluck off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before thy face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_3'>12. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. 7. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_1'>1</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_21'>21</a>. 2 Mac. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_40'>12. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT7_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_17'>13. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT8_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_4'>4. 4</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_4'>4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_21'>9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT8_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of olive tree of oil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT8_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 6. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_12'>12</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT8_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_11'>20 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT8_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_15'>16. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_28'>13. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_24'>4. 24</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_29'>12. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_18'>24. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_28'>34. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_18'>31. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_7'>32. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. 11 <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_1'>1</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT9_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_16'>14. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_1'>34. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_30'>33. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_28'>20. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_20'>18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, former days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. go in journey.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_1'>24. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R219_7'>19. 7</a>. Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_19'>34. 19</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC10_34'>10. 34</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_11'>2. 11</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL2_6'>2 6</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_9'>6. 9</a>. Col <a href='COL.xhtml#CL3_25'>3. 25</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_13'>6. 13</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_10'>4. 10</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_3'>4. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_4'>13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_27'>46 27</a>. Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_5'>1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_5'>15. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_31'>16. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_3'>27. 3</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_17'>106. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, living substance which followed them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was at their feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. seeketh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_8'>6. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_10'>4. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_7'>6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_2'>23. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_13'>27. 13</a> Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS8_33'>8. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT11_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.32</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_32'>5. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_5'>7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, inherit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. break down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_29'>8 29</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R27_12'>7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the choice of your vows.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_9'>10 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_23'>15. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_27'>14. 27</a> Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_31'>7 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all thy days</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_14'>28. 14</a> ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_8'>19. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be strong.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. inheritest, or, possessest them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. after them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. abomination of the.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT12_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.32</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_2'>4. 2</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_7'>1. 7</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_6'>30. 6</a> Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_18'>22. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_20'>10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">spoken recolt against the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bondmen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_13'>17. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, naughty men</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT13_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, devoted</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_28'>19. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_6'>7 6</a> &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_18'>26. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV11_2'>11. 2</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bison.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. dishon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV11_9'>11. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV11_19'>11 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_19'>23. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_26'>34. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. asketh of thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT14_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_19'>12. 19</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. 25. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_2'>2</a>, <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. master of the lending of his hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, To the end that there be no poor among you.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_12'>28. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_42'>5. 42</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_34'>6. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb Belial.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_2'>21. 2</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR34_14'>34. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_6'>21. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_19'>34. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV22_20'>22. 20</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_1'>17. 1</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_12'>35. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT15_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 13. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_16'>16</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_2'>12. 2</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_4'>13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_5'>12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_25'>34. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 coasts]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb restraint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_15'>23. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sufficiency.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. floor and thy winepress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_14'>23. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_23'>34. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_4'>35. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to the gift of his hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_8'>23. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, matters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Justice, justice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_1'>26. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT16_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, statue, or, pillar.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT17_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT17_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU35_30'>35 30</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_15'>19. 15</a> Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_16'>18. 16</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_17'>8. 17</a>. 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C213_1'>13. 1</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT17_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. not to hearken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_20'>18. 20</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_9'>10. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C19_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his sales by the fathers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_21'>18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_27'>20 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_7'>28. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upright, or, sincere.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, inherit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_45'>1. 45</a> Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_22'>3. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_37'>7. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_19'>20. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT18_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_45'>1. 45</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_22'>3. 22</a> &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_37'>7. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_29'>12. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. inheritest, or, possessest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_13'>21. 13</a> Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU35_10'>35. 10</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS20_2'>20. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb from yesterday the third day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. iron.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb wood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb findeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. smite him in life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from yesterday the third day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_20'>12 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS20_7'>20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb in life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU35_30'>35 30</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_6'>17. 6</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_16'>18. 16</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_17'>8 17</a>. 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C213_1'>13. 1</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, falling away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. 19. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_5'>5</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_9'>9</a>. Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_24'>6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT19_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_23'>21. 23</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_20'>24. 20</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_38'>5. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb be tender.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make haste.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made it common See Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_23'>19. 23</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_5'>24. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_3'>7. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. melt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to be in the head of the people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS8_2'>8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spoil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for, O man, the tree of the fickt is to be employed in the siege.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to go from before thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT20_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it come down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the midst.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, suffer to grow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make, or, dress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that is found with him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_18'>3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT21_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the curse of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_4'>23. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fulness of the seed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_19'>19. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_38'>15. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_10'>20. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, take strong hold of her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_16'>22. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT22_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_8'>18. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH13_1'>13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. 22. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_5'>5</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb turncth toward.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sittest down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. nakedness of any thing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is good for him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sodomitess.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_25'>22. 25</a> Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_36'>25. 36</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS15_5'>15. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_4'>5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23.25</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 neighbour's]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT23_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_1'>12. 1</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_23'>2. 23</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_31'>5. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_7'>19 7</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_4'>10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. matter of nakedness</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cutting off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT20_7'>20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. not any thing shall pass upon him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV13_2'>13 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU12_10'>12. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lend the loan of any thing to, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_13'>19 13</a>. Tob. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_14'>4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he lifteth his soul unto it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.16</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K214_6'>14. 6</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R225_4'>25. 4</a>. Jer 31. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_29'>29</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_30'>30</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_20'>18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_9'>19. 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_22'>23. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thou shall not bough it after thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT24_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. after thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.3</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C211_24'>11. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C19_9'>9. 9</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T15_18'>5 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thresheth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_24'>22. 24</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_19'>12 19</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_28'>20. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, next kinsman.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, next kinsman's wife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ruth <a href='RUT.xhtml#RT4_7'>4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a stone and a stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb an ephah and an ephah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT25_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_8'>17. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT26_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 26.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits thy God]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT26_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_28'>14. 28</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT26_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_15'>63. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT26_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT27_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_1'>4. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT27_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_25'>20. 25</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS8_31'>8. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT27_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for a cursing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT27_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_11'>9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT27_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT27_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL2_10'>2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_3'>26. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dough, or, kneading-troughs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, barns.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_9'>30. 9</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. belly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_6'>15. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_14'>26. 14</a>. Lam. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_17'>2. 17</a>. Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML2_2'>2. 2</a>. Bar. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which thou wouldest do.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_16'>26 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, drought.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28.23</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for a removing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_29"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28.29</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 noon days]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.30</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT20_6'>20. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. profane, or, use it as common meat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall not return to thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.37</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_7'>9. 7</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR24_9'>24. 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_9'>25. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_15'>6. 15</a>. Hag. <a href='HAG.xhtml#HG1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_41"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they shall not be thine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_42"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28.42</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 locusts]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_42"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, possess.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_49"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_50"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strong of face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_53"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_29'>26. 29</a>. 2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K26_29'>6 29</a>. Lam. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_10'>4. 10</a> Bar. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_53"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. belly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_57"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. afterbirth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_61"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cause to ascend</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT28_62"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.62</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_22'>10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_4'>19. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_6'>4. 6</a>. 1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K12_2'>2. 2</a>. Josh <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb dungy gods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a poisonful herb</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rosh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, stubbornness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the drunken to the thirsty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is written.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb <span class="add">wherewith the <span class="nd">Lord</span> hath made it sick.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. 19. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>24</a>. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.24</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_8'>9. 8</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_8'>22. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, who had not given to them any portion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT29_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. divided.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT30_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_9'>1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT30_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_11'>28. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT30_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_6'>10 6</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT30_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_26'>4. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_12'>20 12</a>. ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_27'>3. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_21'>27. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_2'>7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_1'>15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lie down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. find them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. do.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT31_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. He hath corrupted to himself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that they are not his children, that is their blot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. generation and generation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cord.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, compassed him about.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, which were not God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, despised.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_9'>10. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hath burned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hath consumed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. burning coals.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the chambers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bereave.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">Our high hand, and not the <span class="nd">Lord,</span> hath done all this.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS23_10'>23. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, is worse than the vine of Sodom, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_1'>28 1</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_19'>12. 19</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_30'>10. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an hiding for you.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.39</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_6'>2 6</a>. Tob. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB13_2'>13. 2</a> Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_13'>16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_43"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Praise his people, ye nations. Or, Sing ye.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_6'>7. 6</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_10'>15. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_44"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Joshua.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.46</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_6'>6 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_18'>11. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_12'>27. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. 20. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_25'>25</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_28'>28</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_38'>33. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. 20. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_12'>12</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_13'>13</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_14'>27. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT32_51"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Strife at Kadesh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a fire of law.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_30'>28. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Let them teach, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, let them put incense.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at thy nose.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_25'>49. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thrust forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. moons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_26'>49. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cieled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Under thy shoes shall be iron.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_6'>23. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT33_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall be subdued.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT34_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The kill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT34_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_27'>3. 27</a>. 2 Mac. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_4'>2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT34_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_15'>13. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT34_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. moisture.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#DT34_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fied.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
