<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Ecclesiastes 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Ecclesiastes</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC12_0'>12</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='EC0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Ecclesiastes or, the Preacher  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="EC1_1">1&#160;</span> The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the sun? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC1_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>One</span> generation passeth away, and <span class='add'>another</span> generation cometh: <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but the earth abideth for ever.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_5">5&#160;</span> The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hasteth to <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>his place where he arose.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_6">6&#160;</span> The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according to his circuits.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea <span class='add'>is</span> not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>return again.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_8">8&#160;</span> All things <span class='add'>are</span> full of labour; man cannot utter <span class='add'>it:</span> the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC1_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The thing that hath been, it <span class='add'>is that</span> which shall be; and that which is done <span class='add'>is</span> that which shall be done: and <span class='add'>there is</span> no new <span class='add'>thing</span> under the sun.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_10">10&#160;</span> Is there <span class='add'>any</span> thing whereof it may be said, See, this <span class='add'>is</span> new? it hath been already of old time, which was before us.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> no remembrance of former <span class='add'>things;</span> neither shall there be <span class='add'>any</span> remembrance of <span class='add'>things</span> that are to come with <span class='add'>those</span> that shall come after. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_13">13&#160;</span> And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning all <span class='add'>things</span> that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to be exercised therewith.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_14">14&#160;</span> I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and, behold, all <span class='add'>is</span> vanity and vexation of spirit.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>That which is</span> crooked cannot be made straight: and <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_16">16&#160;</span> I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have gotten <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>more wisdom than all <span class='add'>they</span> that have been before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.
<span class="verse" id="EC1_18">18&#160;</span> For in much wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> much grief: and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC2_1">1&#160;</span> I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_2">2&#160;</span> I said of laughter, <span class='add'>It is</span> mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?
<span class="verse" id="EC2_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I sought in mine heart <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what <span class='add'>was</span> that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all the days of their life.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_4">4&#160;</span> I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards:
<span class="verse" id="EC2_5">5&#160;</span> I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in them of all <span class='add'>kind of</span> fruits:
<span class="verse" id="EC2_6">6&#160;</span> I made me pools of water, to water therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees:
<span class="verse" id="EC2_7">7&#160;</span> I got <span class='add'>me</span> servants and maidens, and had <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:
<span class="verse" id="EC2_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, <span class='add'>as</span> <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>musical instruments, and that of all sorts.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_9">9&#160;</span> So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_10">10&#160;</span> And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and this was my portion of all my labour.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_11">11&#160;</span> Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>vanity and vexation of spirit, and <span class='add'>there was</span> no profit under the sun. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And I turned myself to behold wisdom, <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and madness, and folly: for what <span class='add'>can</span> the man <span class='add'>do</span> that cometh after the king? <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>even</span> that which hath been already done.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_13">13&#160;</span> Then I saw <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth darkness.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The wise man’s eyes <span class='add'>are</span> in his head; but the fool walketh in darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth to them all.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_15">15&#160;</span> Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_16">16&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>there is</span> no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever; seeing that which now <span class='add'>is</span> in the days to come shall <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>all be forgotten. And how dieth the wise <span class='add'>man</span>? as the fool. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC2_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the sun <span class='add'>is</span> grievous unto me: for all <span class='add'>is</span> vanity and vexation of spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC2_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Yea, I hated all my labour which I had <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taken under the sun: because <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_19">19&#160;</span> And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise <span class='add'>man</span> or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This <span class='add'>is</span> also vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labour which I took under the sun.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_21">21&#160;</span> For there is a man whose labour <span class='add'>is</span> in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>leave it <span class='add'>for</span> his portion. This also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity and a great evil.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?
<span class="verse" id="EC2_23">23&#160;</span> For all his days <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC2_24">24&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>There is</span> nothing better for a man, <span class='add'>than</span> that he should eat and drink, and <span class='add'>that</span> he <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I saw, that it <span class='add'>was</span> from the hand of God.
<span class="verse" id="EC2_25">25&#160;</span> For who can eat, or who else can hasten <span class='add'>hereunto</span>, more than I?
<span class="verse" id="EC2_26">26&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>God</span> giveth to a man that <span class='add'>is</span> good <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up, that <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he may give to <span class='add'>him that is</span> good before God. This also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity and vexation of spirit.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC3_1">1&#160;</span>To every <span class='add'>thing there is</span> a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven:
<span class="verse" id="EC3_2">2&#160;</span> A time <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up <span class='add'>that which is</span> planted;
<span class="verse" id="EC3_3">3&#160;</span> A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up;
<span class="verse" id="EC3_4">4&#160;</span> A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;
<span class="verse" id="EC3_5">5&#160;</span> A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to refrain from embracing;
<span class="verse" id="EC3_6">6&#160;</span> A time to <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to cast away;
<span class="verse" id="EC3_7">7&#160;</span> A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to keep silence, and a time to speak;
<span class="verse" id="EC3_8">8&#160;</span> A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
<span class="verse" id="EC3_10">10&#160;</span> I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised in it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC3_11">11&#160;</span> He hath made every <span class='add'>thing</span> beautiful in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_12">12&#160;</span> I know that <span class='add'>there is</span> no good in them, but for <span class='add'>a man</span> to rejoice, and to do good in his life.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_13">13&#160;</span> And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labour, it <span class='add'>is</span> the gift of God.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_14">14&#160;</span> I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth <span class='add'>it</span>, that <span class='add'>men</span> should fear before him.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already been; and God requireth <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that which is past.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC3_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, <span class='add'>that</span> wickedness <span class='add'>was</span> there; and the place of righteousness, <span class='add'>that</span> iniquity <span class='add'>was</span> there.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_17">17&#160;</span> I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked: for <span class='add'>there is</span> <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a time there for every purpose and for every work.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_18">18&#160;</span> I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are beasts.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: for all <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_20">20&#160;</span> All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.
<span class="verse" id="EC3_21">21&#160;</span> Who knoweth the spirit <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of man that <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?
<span class="verse" id="EC3_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore I perceive that <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that <span class='add'>is</span> his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC4_1">1&#160;</span> So I returned, and considered all the <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of <span class='add'>such as were</span> oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>side of their oppressors <span class='add'>there was</span> power; but they had no comforter.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet alive.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Yea, better <span class='add'>is he</span> than both they, which hath not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Again, I considered all travail, and <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>every right work, that <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for this a man is envied of his neighbour. This <span class='add'>is</span> also vanity and vexation of spirit.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Better <span class='add'>is</span> an handful <span class='add'>with</span> quietness, than both the hands full <span class='add'>with</span> travail and vexation of spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC4_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_8">8&#160;</span> There is one <span class='add'>alone</span>, and <span class='add'>there is</span> not a second; yea, he hath neither child nor brother: yet <span class='add'>is there</span> no end of all his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither <span class='add'>saith he</span>, For whom do I labour, and bereave my soul of good? This <span class='add'>is</span> also vanity, yea, it <span class='add'>is</span> a sore travail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC4_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Two <span class='add'>are</span> better than one; because they have a good reward for their labour.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_10">10&#160;</span> For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him <span class='add'>that is</span> alone when he falleth; for <span class='add'>he hath</span> not another to help him up.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_11">11&#160;</span> Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be warm <span class='add'>alone</span>?
<span class="verse" id="EC4_12">12&#160;</span> And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC4_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Better <span class='add'>is</span> a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king, <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who will no more be admonished.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_14">14&#160;</span> For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also <span class='add'>he that is</span> born in his kingdom becometh poor.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_15">15&#160;</span> I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the second child that shall stand up in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="EC4_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> no end of all the people, <span class='add'>even</span> of all that have been before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity and vexation of spirit.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC5_1">1&#160;</span> Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to hear, <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they do evil.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_2">2&#160;</span> Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter <span class='add'>any</span> <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thing before God: for God <span class='add'>is</span> in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>few.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_3">3&#160;</span> For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool’s voice <span class='add'>is known</span> by multitude of words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC5_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for <span class='add'>he hath</span> no pleasure in fools: <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pay that which thou hast vowed.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_5">5&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is it</span> that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_6">6&#160;</span> Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it <span class='add'>was</span> an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
<span class="verse" id="EC5_7">7&#160;</span> For in the multitude of dreams and many words <span class='add'>there are</span> also <span class='add'>divers</span> vanities: but fear thou God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC5_8">8&#160;</span>¶ If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at the matter: for <span class='add'>he that is</span> higher than the highest regardeth; and <span class='add'>there be</span> higher than they.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC5_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king <span class='add'>himself</span> is served by the field.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_10">10&#160;</span> He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase: this <span class='add'>is</span> also vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_11">11&#160;</span> When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good <span class='add'>is there</span> to the owners thereof, saving the beholding <span class='add'>of them</span> with their eyes?
<span class="verse" id="EC5_12">12&#160;</span> The sleep of a labouring man <span class='add'>is</span> sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_13">13&#160;</span> There is a sore evil <span class='add'>which</span> I have seen under the sun, <span class='add'>namely</span>, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_14">14&#160;</span> But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son, and <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> As he came forth of his mother’s womb, naked shall he return to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry away in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_16">16&#160;</span> And this also <span class='add'>is</span> a sore evil, <span class='add'>that</span> in all points as he came, so shall he go: and <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind?
<span class="verse" id="EC5_17">17&#160;</span> All his days also he eateth in darkness, and <span class='add'>he hath</span> much sorrow and wrath with his sickness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC5_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Behold <span class='add'>that</span> which I have seen: <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>it is</span> good and comely <span class='add'>for one</span> to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he taketh under the sun <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all the days of his life, which God giveth him: for it <span class='add'>is</span> his portion.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_19">19&#160;</span> Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labour; this <span class='add'>is</span> the gift of God.
<span class="verse" id="EC5_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because God answereth  <span class='add'>him</span> in the joy of his heart.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC6_1">1&#160;</span> There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it <span class='add'>is</span> common among men:
<span class="verse" id="EC6_2">2&#160;</span> A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eateth it: this <span class='add'>is</span> vanity, and it <span class='add'>is</span> an evil disease. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC6_3">3&#160;</span>¶ If a man beget an hundred <span class='add'>children</span>, and live many years, so that the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good, and also <span class='add'>that</span> he have no burial; I say, <span class='add'>that</span> an untimely birth <span class='add'>is</span> better than he.
<span class="verse" id="EC6_4">4&#160;</span> For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his name shall be covered with darkness.
<span class="verse" id="EC6_5">5&#160;</span> Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known <span class='add'>any thing:</span> this hath more rest than the other. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC6_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Yea, though he live a thousand years twice <span class='add'>told</span>, yet hath he seen no good: do not all go to one place? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC6_7">7&#160;</span> All the labour of man <span class='add'>is</span> for his mouth, and yet the <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>appetite is not filled.
<span class="verse" id="EC6_8">8&#160;</span> For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor, that knoweth to walk before the living? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Better <span class='add'>is</span> the sight of the eyes <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>than the wandering of the desire: this <span class='add'>is</span> also vanity and vexation of spirit.
<span class="verse" id="EC6_10">10&#160;</span> That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it <span class='add'>is</span> man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC6_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what <span class='add'>is</span> man the better?
<span class="verse" id="EC6_12">12&#160;</span> For who knoweth what <span class='add'>is</span> good for man in <span class='add'>this</span> life, <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC7_1">1&#160;</span> A <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>good name <span class='add'>is</span> better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of one’s birth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC7_2">2&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>It is</span> better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that <span class='add'>is</span> the end of all men; and the living will lay <span class='add'>it</span> to his heart.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Sorrow <span class='add'>is</span> better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_4">4&#160;</span> The heart of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools <span class='add'>is</span> in the house of mirth.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the song of fools.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_6">6&#160;</span> For as the <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>crackling of thorns under a pot, so <span class='add'>is</span> the laughter of the fool: this also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC7_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and a gift destroyeth the heart.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_8">8&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: <span class='add'>and</span> the patient in spirit <span class='add'>is</span> better than the proud in spirit.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the bosom of fools.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_10">10&#160;</span> Say not thou, What is <span class='add'>the cause</span> that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not enquire <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wisely concerning this.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC7_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Wisdom <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>is</span> good with an inheritance: and <span class='add'>by it there is</span> profit to them that see the sun.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_12">12&#160;</span> For wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> a <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>defence, <span class='add'>and</span> money <span class='add'>is</span> a defence: but the excellency of knowledge <span class='add'>is, that</span> wisdom giveth life to them that have it.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_13">13&#160;</span> Consider the work of God: for <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>who can make <span class='add'>that</span> straight, which he hath made crooked?
<span class="verse" id="EC7_14">14&#160;</span> In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider: God also hath <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_15">15&#160;</span>All <span class='add'>things</span> have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just <span class='add'>man</span> that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked <span class='add'>man</span> that prolongeth <span class='add'>his life</span> in his wickedness.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_16">16&#160;</span> Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why shouldest thou <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy thyself?
<span class="verse" id="EC7_17">17&#160;</span> Be not over much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>before thy time?
<span class="verse" id="EC7_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth of them all.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty <span class='add'>men</span> which are in the city.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For <span class='add'>there is</span> not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_21">21&#160;</span> Also <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear thy servant curse thee:
<span class="verse" id="EC7_22">22&#160;</span> For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC7_23">23&#160;</span>¶ All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it <span class='add'>was</span> far from me.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_24">24&#160;</span> That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?
<span class="verse" id="EC7_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out wisdom, and the reason <span class='add'>of things</span>, and to know the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness <span class='add'>and</span> madness:
<span class="verse" id="EC7_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And I find more bitter than death the woman, whose heart <span class='add'>is</span> snares and nets, <span class='add'>and</span> her hands <span class='add'>as</span> bands: <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by her.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_27">27&#160;</span> Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>counting</span> one by one, to find out the account:
<span class="verse" id="EC7_28">28&#160;</span> Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all those have I not found.
<span class="verse" id="EC7_29">29&#160;</span> Lo, this only have I found, <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC8_1">1&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> as the wise <span class='add'>man</span>? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine, and <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the boldness of his face shall be changed.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_2">2&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>counsel thee</span> to keep the king’s commandment, and <span class='add'>that</span> in regard of the oath of God.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_3">3&#160;</span> Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing; for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_4">4&#160;</span> Where the word of a king <span class='add'>is, there is</span> power: and who may say unto him, What doest thou?
<span class="verse" id="EC8_5">5&#160;</span> Whoso keepeth the commandment <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall feel no evil thing: and a wise man’s heart discerneth both time and judgment.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC8_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the misery of man <span class='add'>is</span> great upon him.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_7">7&#160;</span> For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when it shall be?
<span class="verse" id="EC8_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> no man that hath power <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>over the spirit to retain the spirit; neither <span class='add'>hath he</span> power in the day of death: and <span class='add'>there is</span> no <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>discharge in <span class='add'>that</span> war; neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC8_9">9&#160;</span> All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is done under the sun: <span class='add'>there is</span> a time wherein one man ruleth over another to his own hurt.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_10">10&#160;</span> And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had so done: this <span class='add'>is</span> also vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_11">11&#160;</span> Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC8_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his <span class='add'>days</span> be prolonged, yet surely I know that <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him:
<span class="verse" id="EC8_13">13&#160;</span> But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong <span class='add'>his</span> days, <span class='add'>which are</span> as a shadow; because he feareth not before God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC8_14">14&#160;</span> There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be just <span class='add'>men</span>, unto whom it <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>happeneth according to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked <span class='add'>men</span>, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous: I said that this also <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC8_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC8_16">16&#160;</span>¶ When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the earth: (for also <span class='add'>there is that</span> neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes:)
<span class="verse" id="EC8_17">17&#160;</span> Then I beheld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because though a man labour to seek <span class='add'>it</span> out, <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>yet he shall not find <span class='add'>it;</span> yea further; though a wise <span class='add'>man</span> think to know <span class='add'>it</span>, yet shall he not be able to find <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC9_1">1&#160;</span> For all this <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I considered in my heart even to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, <span class='add'>are</span> in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred <span class='add'>by</span> all <span class='add'>that is</span> before them.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All <span class='add'>things come</span> alike to all: <span class='add'>there is</span> one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as <span class='add'>is</span> the good, so <span class='add'>is</span> the sinner; <span class='add'>and</span> he that sweareth, as <span class='add'>he</span> that feareth an oath.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_3">3&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> an evil among all <span class='add'>things</span> that are done under the sun, that <span class='add'>there is</span> one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness <span class='add'>is</span> in their heart while they live, and after that <span class='add'>they go</span> to the dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC9_4">4&#160;</span>¶ For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_5">5&#160;</span> For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_6">6&#160;</span> Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any <span class='add'>thing</span> that is done under the sun. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC9_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_8">8&#160;</span> Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for that <span class='add'>is</span> thy portion in <span class='add'>this</span> life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_10">10&#160;</span> Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do <span class='add'>it</span> with thy might; for <span class='add'>there is</span> no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC9_11">11&#160;</span>¶ I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race <span class='add'>is</span> not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_12">12&#160;</span> For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of men <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC9_13">13&#160;</span>¶ This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it <span class='add'>seemed</span> great unto me:
<span class="verse" id="EC9_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There was</span> a little city, and few men within it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it:
<span class="verse" id="EC9_15">15&#160;</span> Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same poor man.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then said I, Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> better than strength: nevertheless the poor man’s wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> despised, and his words are not heard.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_17">17&#160;</span> The words of wise <span class='add'>men are</span> heard in quiet more than the cry of him that ruleth among fools.
<span class="verse" id="EC9_18">18&#160;</span> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> better than weapons of war: but one sinner destroyeth much good.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_1">1&#160;</span> Dead <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: <span class='add'>so doth</span> a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom <span class='add'>and</span> honour.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_2">2&#160;</span> A wise man’s heart <span class='add'>is</span> at his right hand; but a fool’s heart at his left.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_3">3&#160;</span> Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his wisdom faileth <span class='add'>him</span>, and he saith to every one <span class='add'>that</span> he <span class='add'>is</span> a fool.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_4">4&#160;</span> If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great offences.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_5">5&#160;</span> There is an evil <span class='add'>which</span> I have seen under the sun, as an error <span class='add'>which</span> proceedeth <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the ruler:
<span class="verse" id="EC10_6">6&#160;</span> Folly is set <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_7">7&#160;</span> I have seen servants <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>upon horses, and princes walking as servants upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_9">9&#160;</span> Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; <span class='add'>and</span> he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_10">10&#160;</span> If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength: but wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> profitable to direct.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_11">11&#160;</span> Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a babbler is no better.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The words of a wise man’s mouth <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gracious; but the lips of a fool will swallow up himself.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_13">13&#160;</span> The beginning of the words of his mouth <span class='add'>is</span> foolishness: and the end of <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his talk <span class='add'>is</span> mischievous madness.
<span class="verse" id="EC10_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A fool also <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>what shall be after him, who can tell him?
<span class="verse" id="EC10_15">15&#160;</span> The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to go to the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Woe to thee, O land, when thy king <span class='add'>is</span> a child, and thy princes eat in the morning!
<span class="verse" id="EC10_17">17&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>art</span> thou, O land, when thy king <span class='add'>is</span> the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_18">18&#160;</span>¶ By much slothfulness the building decayeth; and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth through. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_19">19&#160;</span>¶ A feast is made for laughter, and <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wine <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>maketh merry: but money answereth all <span class='add'>things</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC10_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Curse not the king, no not in thy <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC11_1">1&#160;</span> Cast thy bread <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>many days.
<span class="verse" id="EC11_2">2&#160;</span> Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EC11_3">3&#160;</span> If the clouds be full of rain, they empty <span class='add'>themselves</span> upon the earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.
<span class="verse" id="EC11_4">4&#160;</span> He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.
<span class="verse" id="EC11_5">5&#160;</span> As thou knowest not what <span class='add'>is</span> the way of the spirit, <span class='add'>nor</span> how the bones <span class='add'>do grow</span> in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.
<span class="verse" id="EC11_6">6&#160;</span> In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand: for thou knowest not whether <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both <span class='add'>shall be</span> alike good.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC11_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Truly the light <span class='add'>is</span> sweet, and a pleasant <span class='add'>thing it is</span> for the eyes to behold the sun:
<span class="verse" id="EC11_8">8&#160;</span> But if a man live many years, <span class='add'>and</span> rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh <span class='add'>is</span> vanity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC11_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these <span class='add'>things</span> God will bring thee into judgment.
<span class="verse" id="EC11_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore remove <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth <span class='add'>are</span> vanity.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EC12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC12_1">1&#160;</span> Remember <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;
<span class="verse" id="EC12_2">2&#160;</span> While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain:
<span class="verse" id="EC12_3">3&#160;</span> In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened,
<span class="verse" id="EC12_4">4&#160;</span> And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low;
<span class="verse" id="EC12_5">5&#160;</span>Also <span class='add'>when</span> they shall be afraid of <span class='add'>that which is</span> high, and fears <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets:
<span class="verse" id="EC12_6">6&#160;</span> Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.
<span class="verse" id="EC12_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC12_8">8&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all <span class='add'>is</span> vanity.
<span class="verse" id="EC12_9">9&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>set in order many proverbs.
<span class="verse" id="EC12_10">10&#160;</span> The preacher sought to find out <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>acceptable words: and <span class='add'>that which was</span> written <span class='add'>was</span> upright, <span class='add'>even</span> words of truth.
<span class="verse" id="EC12_11">11&#160;</span> The words of the wise <span class='add'>are</span> as goads, and as nails fastened <span class='add'>by</span> the masters of assemblies, <span class='add'>which</span> are given from one shepherd.
<span class="verse" id="EC12_12">12&#160;</span> And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many books <span class='add'>there is</span> no end; and much <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>study <span class='add'>is</span> a weariness of the flesh.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EC12_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this <span class='add'>is</span> the whole <span class='add'>duty</span> of man.
<span class="verse" id="EC12_14">14&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether <span class='add'>it be</span> good, or whether <span class='add'>it be</span> evil. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 39. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS39_5'>5</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS39_6'>6</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_9'>62. 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS144_4'>144 4</a>. ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC12_8'>12. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_22'>2. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_5'>104. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_90'>119. 90</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. panteth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_10'>38. 10</a>. Ps. 104. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_8'>8</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. return to go.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_15'>3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to afflict them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_13'>7 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. defect.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_30'>4. 30</a>. &amp;c 10. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_7'>7</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. had seen much.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC1_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_12'>2. 12</a> &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_23'>7. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb to draw my flesh with wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the number of the days of their life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sons of my house</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_28'>9 28</a> &amp;c <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_14'>10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb musical instrument and instruments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_3'>1. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_17'>1. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_25'>7. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in those things which have been already done.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that there is an excellency in wisdom more than in folly, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_24'>17. 24</a>. ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC8_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. happeneth to me, even to me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits all]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. laboured.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_10'>49. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_3'>1 3</a> &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 3. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_12'>12</a>, <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_13'>13</a>, <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_22'>22</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC6_18'>6. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC8_15'>8. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, delight his senses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC2_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_17'>27. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to bear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to be far from.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, seek.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_3'>1. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_9'>1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that which is driven away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_1'>1.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that they might clear God, and see, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_12'>49. 12</a>. ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_16'>2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of the sons of man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is ascending.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC3_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_24'>2. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_18'>5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_8'>5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_17'>3. 17</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Job 3. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_11'>11</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_16'>16</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all the rightness of work.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. this is the envy of a man from his neighbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_10'>6. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_33'>24. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_16'>15. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_8'>16. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC4_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who knoweth not to be admonished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_22'>15. 22</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_8'>50. 8</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_8'>15. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_27'>21. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_19'>10. 19</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_7'>6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_21'>23. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 66. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS66_13'>13</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS66_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the will, or, purpose.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_21'>1. 21</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_17'>49 17</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_7'>6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_24'>2. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_12'>3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. there is a good which is comely, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the number of the days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC5_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Though he give not much, yet he remembereth, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC6_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. than the walking of the soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC6_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the number of the days of the life of his vanity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC6_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS144_4'>144. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_80'>15. 80</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_1'>22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Anger.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_18'>13. 18</a> &amp;c 15. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_31'>31</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_32'>32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sound.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_19'>16. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_17'>14 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_32'>16. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. out of wisdom</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as good as an inheritance, yea, better too.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shadow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_15'>1 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be desolate?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb not in thy time?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_22'>21. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_5'>24 5</a>. ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_16'>9. 16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_46'>8. 46</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_9'>20. 9</a>. 1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN1_8'>1 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. give not thine heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I and mine heart compassed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_14'>22 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he that is good before God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, weighing one thing after another to find out the reason.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC7_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>1. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_24'>17. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall know.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, how it shall be?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_5'>14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, casting off weapons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 37. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_11'>11</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_18'>18</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_14'>73. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_22'>3. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC8_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits yet he shall not find it]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC9_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I gave, or, set to my heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 73. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_3'>3</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_12'>12</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_13'>13</a>. Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_15'>3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC9_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. See, or, enjoy life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_24'>2. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_13'>3 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_18'>5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_6'>29. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC9_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_22'>21. 22</a>. ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_19'>7. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Flies of death.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from before.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in great heights</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_22'>30 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_15'>7 15</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_27'>26. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the master of the tongue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_32'>10. 32</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_13'>12 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. grace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_2'>15 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiplieth words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_22'>3 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC6_12'>6 12</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. 3. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_4'>4</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_15'>104. 15</a>,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. maketh glad the life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_28'>22. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC10_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, conscience.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon the face of the waters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_10'>15 10</a>. Prov <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_17'>19. 17</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_42'>10. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall be right.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC11_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, anger.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_6'>22 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the grinders fail, because they grind little.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_2'>1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the more wise the preacher was, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_32'>4. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words of delight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reading.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The end of the matter, even all that hath been heard, is.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EC12_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_16'>2 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_10'>14. 10</a>. 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_10'>5. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
