<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Esther (Greek) 10</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Esther (Greek)</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='EG0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Rest of the Chapters of the Book of Esther  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='s'>PART OF THE TENTH CHAPTER AFTER THE GREEK </div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="EG10_4">4&#160;</span>Then Mardocheus said, God hath done these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_5">5&#160;</span>For I remember <a href='#FN1'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>a dream which I saw concerning these matters, and nothing thereof hath failed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_6">6&#160;</span>A little fountain became a river, and there was light, and the sun, and much water: this river is Esther, whom the king married, and made queen: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_7">7&#160;</span>And the two dragons are I and Aman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_8">8&#160;</span>And the nations were those that were assembled to destroy the name of the Jews: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_9">9&#160;</span>And my nation is this Israel, which cried to God, and were saved: for the Lord hath saved his people, and the Lord hath delivered us from all those evils, and God hath wrought <a href='#FN2'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>signs and great wonders, which have not been done among the Gentiles. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore hath he made two <a href='#FN3'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>lots, one for the people of God, and another for all the Gentiles. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_11">11&#160;</span>And these two lots came at the hour, and time, and <a href='#FN4'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>day of judgment, before God among all nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_12">12&#160;</span>So God remembered his people, and justified his inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG10_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore those days shall be unto them <a href='#FN5'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>in the month Adar, <a href='#FN6'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the same month, with an assembly, and joy, and with gladness before God, according to the generations for ever among his people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_1">1&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN7'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the fourth year of the reign of <a href='#FN8'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Ptolemeus and Cleopatra, Dositheus, who said he was a priest and Levite, and Ptolemeus his son, brought this epistle of <a href='#FN9'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Phurim, which they said was the same, and that Lysimachus the son of Ptolemeus, that was in Jerusalem, had interpreted it. </div>
<div class='s'>[PLACED IN THE GREEK BEFORE CHAP. 1.1 OF THE HEBREW] </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_2">2&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN10'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the second year of the reign of Artexerxes the great, in the first day of the month Nisan, <a href='#FN11'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Mardocheus the son of Jairus, the son of Semei, the son of Cisai, of the tribe of Benjamin, had <a href='#FN12'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>a dream; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Who was a Jew, and dwelt in the city of <a href='#FN14'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Susa, a great man, being a <a href='#FN15'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>servitor in the king’s court. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>He was also one of the captives, which Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon carried from Jerusalem with Jechonias king of Judea; and this was his <a href='#FN17'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>dream: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_5">5&#160;</span>Behold a noise of a tumult, with thunder, and earthquakes, and uproar in the land: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_6">6&#160;</span>And, behold, two great dragons came forth ready to fight, and their cry was great. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_7">7&#160;</span>And at their cry all nations were prepared to battle, that they might fight against the righteous people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_8">8&#160;</span>And lo <a href='#FN18'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>a day of darkness and obscurity, <a href='#FN19'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>tribulation and anguish, affliction and great uproar, upon earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_9">9&#160;</span>And the whole righteous nation was troubled, fearing their own evils, and were ready to perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_10">10&#160;</span>Then they cried unto God, and upon their cry, as it were from a little fountain, was made a great flood, even much water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_11">11&#160;</span>The light and the sun rose up, and the lowly were exalted, and devoured <a href='#FN20'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the glorious. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG11_12">12&#160;</span>Now when Mardocheus, who had seen this <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>dream, and what God had determined to do, was awake, he bare this dream in mind, and until night by all means was desirous to know it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG12_1">1&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN22'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Mardocheus took his rest in the court with Gabatha and Tharra, the two eunuchs of the king, and keepers of the palace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG12_2">2&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN23'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>he heard their devices, and searched out their purposes, and learned that they were about to lay hands upon Artexerxes the king; and so he certified the king of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG12_3">3&#160;</span>Then the king examined the two eunuchs, and after that they had confessed it, they were strangled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG12_4">4&#160;</span>And the king made a record of these things, and Mardocheus also wrote thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG12_5">5&#160;</span>So the king commanded, Mardocheus to serve in the court, and for this he rewarded him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG12_6">6&#160;</span>Howbeit <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Aman the son of Amadathus the <a href='#FN25'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Agagite, who was <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>in great honour with the king, sought to molest Mardocheus and his people because of the two eunuchs of the king.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='s'>[PLACED IN THE GREEK AFTER CHAP. 3.13 OF THE HEBREW] </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_1">1&#160;</span>The copy of the letters was this: <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>The great king Artexerxes writeth these things to the princes and governours that are under him <a href='#FN28'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>from India unto Ethiopia in an hundred and seven and twenty provinces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_2">2&#160;</span>After that I became lord over many nations and had dominion over the whole <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>world, not lifted up with presumption of my authority, but carrying myself always with equity and mildness, I purposed to settle <a href='#FN30'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>my subjects continually in a quiet life, and making my kingdom <a href='#FN31'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>peaceable, and open for passage to the utmost coasts, to renew peace, which is desired of all men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_3">3&#160;</span>Now when I asked my counsellors how this might be brought to pass, Aman, that excelled in wisdom among us, and was <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>approved for his constant good will and steadfast fidelity, and <a href='#FN33'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>had the honour of the second place in the kingdom, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Declared unto us, that in all nations throughout <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the world there was scattered a certain malicious people, that had laws contrary to all nations, and continually despised the commandments of kings, so as the uniting of our kingdoms, honourably <a href='#FN36'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>intended by us cannot <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>go forward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_5">5&#160;</span>Seeing then we understand that this people alone is continually in opposition unto all men, differing in the strange manner of their laws, and evil affected to our state, working all the mischief they can that our kingdom may not be firmly established: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore have we commanded, that all they that are signified in writing unto you by Aman, who is ordained over the affairs, and is <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>next unto us, shall all, with their wives and children, be utterly destroyed by the sword of their enemies, without all mercy and pity, the <a href='#FN39'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>fourteenth day of the twelfth month Adar of this present year: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_7">7&#160;</span>That they, who of old and now also are malicious, may in one day with violence go into the grave, and so ever hereafter cause our affairs to be well settled, and without trouble. </div>
<div class='s'>[PLACED IN THE GREEK AFTER CHAP. 4.17 OF THE HEBREW] </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_8">8&#160;</span>Then Mardocheus thought upon all the works of the Lord, and made his prayer unto him, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_9">9&#160;</span>Saying, O Lord, Lord, the King <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Almighty: for the whole world is in thy power, and if thou hast appointed to save Israel, there is no man that can gainsay thee: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>For thou hast made heaven and earth, and all the wondrous things under the heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_11">11&#160;</span>Thou art Lord of all things, and and there is no man that can resist thee, which art the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Thou knowest all things, and thou knowest, Lord, that it was neither in contempt nor pride, nor for any desire of glory, that <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>I did not bow down to proud Aman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_13">13&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN44'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>I could have been content with good will for the salvation of Israel to kiss the soles of his feet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_14">14&#160;</span>But I did this, that I might not prefer the glory of man above the glory of God: <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>neither will I worship any but thee, O God, neither will I do it in pride. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_15">15&#160;</span>And now, O Lord God and King, <a href='#FN46'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>spare thy people: for their eyes are upon us to bring us to nought; yea, they desire to destroy the inheritance, that hath been thine from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_16">16&#160;</span>Despise not the portion, <a href='#FN47'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>which thou hast delivered out of Egypt for thine own self. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_17">17&#160;</span>Hear my prayer, and be merciful unto thine inheritance: <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>turn our sorrow into joy, that we may live, O Lord, and praise thy name: and <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>destroy not the mouths of them that praise thee, O Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG13_18">18&#160;</span>All Israel in like manner cried <a href='#FN51'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>most earnestly unto the Lord, because their death was before their eyes.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_1">1&#160;</span>Queen Esther also, being in fear of death, resorted unto the Lord: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_2">2&#160;</span>And laid away her glorious apparel, and put on <a href='#FN52'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the garments of anguish and mourning: and <a href='#FN53'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>instead of precious ointments, <a href='#FN54'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>she covered her head with ashes and dung, and <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>she humbled her body greatly, and all the places of her joy she filled <a href='#FN56'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a><a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>with her torn hair. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_3">3&#160;</span>And she prayed unto the Lord God of Israel, saying, O my Lord, thou only art our King: help me, desolate woman, which have no helper but thee: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_4">4&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>my danger is in mine hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_5">5&#160;</span>From my youth up I have heard in the tribe of my family that thou, O Lord, <a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>tookest Israel from among all people, and <a href='#FN60'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>our fathers from all their predecessors, for a perpetual inheritance, and thou hast performed whatsoever thou didst promise them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>And now we have sinned before thee: therefore hast thou given us into the hands of our enemies, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_7">7&#160;</span>Because we worshipped their gods: O Lord, <a href='#FN62'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>thou art righteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_8">8&#160;</span>Nevertheless it satisfieth them not, that we are in bitter captivity: but they have <a href='#FN63'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>stricken hands with their idols, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_9">9&#160;</span>That they will abolish the thing that thou with thy mouth hast ordained, and destroy thine inheritance, and <a href='#FN64'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>stop the mouth of them that praise thee, and quench the glory of thy house, and of thine altar, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_10">10&#160;</span>And open the mouths of the heathen to set forth the praises of the <a href='#FN65'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>idols, and <a href='#FN66'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>to magnify a fleshly king for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_11">11&#160;</span>O Lord, give not thy sceptre unto them that <a href='#FN67'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be nothing, and let them not laugh at our fall; but turn their device upon themselves, and <a href='#FN68'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>make him an example, that hath begun this against us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_12">12&#160;</span>Remember, O Lord, <a href='#FN69'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>make thyself known in time of our affliction, and give me boldness, O King of the <a href='#FN70'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>nations, and Lord of all power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_13">13&#160;</span>Give me eloquent speech in my mouth before <a href='#FN71'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the lion: turn his heart to hate <a href='#FN72'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>him that fighteth against us, that there may be an end of him, and of all that are likeminded to him: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_14">14&#160;</span>But deliver us with thine hand, and help me that am desolate, and which have no other help but thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Thou knowest all things, O Lord; thou knowest that I hate the glory of the unrighteous, and abhor the bed of the uncircumcised, and of <a href='#FN74'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the heathen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_16">16&#160;</span>Thou knowest my necessity: for I abhor the sign of my <a href='#FN75'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>high estate, <a href='#FN76'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>which is upon mine head in the days wherein I shew myself, and that I abhor it <a href='#FN77'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>as a menstruous rag, and that I wear it not when I am <a href='#FN78'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>private by myself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_17">17&#160;</span>And that thine handmaid <a href='#FN79'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>hath not eaten at Aman’s table, and that I have not greatly esteemed the king’s feast, nor drunk the wine of the drink offerings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_18">18&#160;</span>Neither had thine handmaid any joy since the day <a href='#FN80'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that I was brought hither to this present, but in thee, O Lord God of Abraham. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG14_19">19&#160;</span>O thou mighty God above all, hear the voice of the <a href='#FN81'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>forlorn and deliver us out of the hands of the mischievous, and deliver me out of <a href='#FN82'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>my fear.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And upon the third day, when she had ended her prayers, <a href='#FN84'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>she laid away her mourning garments, and put on her glorious apparel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_2">2&#160;</span>And being gloriously adorned, after she had called upon God, who is the <a href='#FN85'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>beholder and <a href='#FN86'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>saviour of all things, she took two <a href='#FN87'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>maids with her: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_3">3&#160;</span>And upon the one she leaned, as carrying herself <a href='#FN88'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>daintily; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_4">4&#160;</span>And the other followed, bearing up her train. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_5">5&#160;</span>And she was <a href='#FN89'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ruddy through the perfection of her beauty, and her countenance was cheerful <a href='#FN90'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and very amiable: but her heart was in anguish <a href='#FN91'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>for fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_6">6&#160;</span>Then having passed through all the doors, she stood before the king, who sat upon his royal throne, and was clothed with all his robes of majesty, all glittering with gold and precious stones; and he was very dreadful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_7">7&#160;</span>Then lifting up his countenance that shone with majesty, he looked very fiercely upon her: and the queen fell down, and was pale, and <a href='#FN92'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>fainted, and bowed herself upon the head of the <a href='#FN93'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>maid that went <a href='#FN94'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>before her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_8">8&#160;</span>Then God changed the spirit of the king into mildness, who <a href='#FN95'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in a fear leaped from his throne, and took her in his arms, till she came to herself again, and comforted her with loving words and said unto her, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_9">9&#160;</span>Esther, what is the matter? I am <a href='#FN96'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>thy brother, be of good cheer: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_10">10&#160;</span>Thou shalt not die, though our commandment be <a href='#FN97'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>general: come near. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_11">11&#160;</span>And so he held up his golden sceptre, and laid it upon her neck, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_12">12&#160;</span>And embraced her, and said, Speak unto me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_13">13&#160;</span>Then said she unto him, I saw thee, my lord, <a href='#FN98'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>as an angel of God, and my heart was troubled for fear of thy majesty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_14">14&#160;</span>For wonderful art thou, lord, and thy countenance is full of grace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_15">15&#160;</span>And as she was speaking, <a href='#FN99'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>she fell down for <a href='#FN100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>faintness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG15_16">16&#160;</span>Then the king was troubled, and all his servants comforted her.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EG16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='s'>[PLACED IN THE GREEK AFTER CHAP. 8.12 OF THE HEBREW] </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>The great king Artexerxes unto the princes and governors of an hundred and seven and twenty provinces <a href='#FN102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>from India unto Ethiopia, and unto all <a href='#FN103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>our faithful subjects, greeting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_2">2&#160;</span>Many, the more often they are honoured with the great bounty of <a href='#FN104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>their gracious princes, the more proud they are waxen, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_3">3&#160;</span>And endeavour to hurt not <a href='#FN105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>our subjects only, but not being able to bear abundance, do take in hand to practise also against those that do them good: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_4">4&#160;</span>And take not only thankfulness away from among men, but also lifted up with the glorious words of <a href='#FN106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lewd persons, <a href='#FN107'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that were never good, they think to escape the justice of God, <a href='#FN108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that seeth all things and hateth evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_5">5&#160;</span>Oftentimes also fair speech <a href='#FN109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of those, that are put in trust to manage their friends’ affairs, hath caused many that are in authority to be partakers of innocent blood, and hath enwrapped them in remediless calamities: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_6">6&#160;</span>Beguiling with the falsehood and deceit of their <a href='#FN110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>lewd disposition the innocency and goodness of princes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_7">7&#160;</span>Now ye may see this, as we have declared, not so much by ancient histories, as ye may, if ye search what hath been wickedly done of late through the pestilent behaviour of them that are unworthily placed in authority. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_8">8&#160;</span>And we must take care for the time to come, that our kingdom may be quiet and peaceable for all men, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_9">9&#160;</span>Both by changing our purposes, and always judging things that are evident with more equal proceeding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_10">10&#160;</span>For Aman, <a href='#FN111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>a Macedonian, the son of <a href='#FN112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Amadatha, being indeed a stranger from the Persian blood, and far distant from our goodness, and as a stranger received of us, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_11">11&#160;</span>Had so far forth obtained the favour that we shew toward every nation, as that he was called our <a href='#FN113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>father, and was continually honoured of all <a href='#FN114'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the next person unto the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_12">12&#160;</span>But he, not bearing his <a href='#FN115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>great dignity, went about to deprive us of our kingdom and life: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_13">13&#160;</span>Having by manifold and cunning deceits sought of us the destruction, as well of Mardocheus, who saved our life, and continually procured our good, as also of blameless Esther, partaker of our kingdom, with their whole nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_14">14&#160;</span>For by these means he thought, finding us destitute of friends, to have translated the kingdom of the Persians to the Macedonians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_15">15&#160;</span>But we find that the Jews, whom this wicked wretch hath delivered to utter destruction, are no evildoers, but live by most just laws: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_16">16&#160;</span>And that they be children of <a href='#FN116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the most high and most mighty, <a href='#FN117'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>living God, who hath <a href='#FN118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ordered the kingdom both unto us and to our progenitors in the most excellent manner. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_17">17&#160;</span>Wherefore ye shall do well not to put in execution the letters sent unto you by Aman the son of <a href='#FN119'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Amadatha. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_18">18&#160;</span>For he that was the worker of these things, <a href='#FN120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>is hanged at the gates of <a href='#FN121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Susa <a href='#FN122'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>with all his family: God, who ruleth all things, speedily rendering vengeance to him according to his deserts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore ye shall publish the copy of this letter in all places, that the Jews may freely live after their own laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_20">20&#160;</span>And ye shall aid them, that even the same day, being the thirteenth day of the twelfth month Adar, they may be avenged on them, who in the time of their affliction shall set upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_21">21&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Almighty God hath turned to joy unto them the day, wherein <a href='#FN124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the chosen people should have perished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_22">22&#160;</span>Ye shall therefore among your solemn feasts keep it an high day with all feasting: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_23">23&#160;</span>That both now and hereafter there may be safety to us and the well affected Persians; but to those which do conspire against us a memorial of destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EG16_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>every city and country whatsoever, which shall not do according to these things, shall be destroyed without mercy with fire and sword, and shall be made not only unpassable for men, but also most hateful to wild beasts and fowls for ever. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG10_5"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_2'>ch. 11. 2</a>, <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_4'>4–11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG10_9"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_3'>Ex. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG10_10"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_7'>ch. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG10_11"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_17'>Judith 16. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG10_13"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_21'>ch. 9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG10_13"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_21'>ch. 9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 177].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M11_18'>1 Macc. 1. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_51'>10. 51</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_55'>55</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_57'>57</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_3'>11. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_8'>8</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_13'>13</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_15'>15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_17'>17</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_18'>18</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_21'>2 Macc. 4. 21</a>. [Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. cap. 3].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_26'>ch. 9. 26</a>, <a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_28'>28</a>, <a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET1_3'>ch. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_5'>ch. 2. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_2"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG10_5'>ch. 10. 5–12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_5'>ch. 2. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_3"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_1'>Neh. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_3"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K24_43'>2 Kin. 4. 43</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_6'>ch. 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG10_5'>ch. 10. 5–12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_2'>Joel 2. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_19'>2 Esdr. 16. 19</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_9'>Rom. 2. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_35'>8. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG12_6'>ch. 12. 6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG11_12"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG10_5'>ch. 10. 5–12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG12_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_21'>ch. 2. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='EST.xhtml#ET6_2'>6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG12_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_22'>ch. 2. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG12_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_1'>ch. 3. 1</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG12_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_1'>ch. 3. 1</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG12_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG11_11'>ch. 11. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_7'>ver. 7</a>, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 6. [6].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET1_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_1'>16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_4'>ver. 4</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_7'>Wisd. 1. 7</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_62'>Baruch 6. 62</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_22'>Song 22</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_14'>Matt. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_2"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_3'>ch. 16. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>mild.</span> <a href='1TI.xhtml#T12_2'>1 Tim. 2. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_22'>Acts 2. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_6'>ver. 6</a>. See <a href='EST.xhtml#ET10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_8'>ch. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_4'>ver. 4</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_7'>Wisd. 1. 7</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_62'>Baruch 6. 62</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_22'>Song 22</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_14'>Matt. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_16'>ch. 16. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>be settled</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>second from us</span>. So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_4'>Judith 2. 4</a>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_3'>ver. 3</a>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_11'>ch. 16. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_13'>ch. 3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_21'>ch. 16. 21</a>. See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_10"><span class="notemark">j</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_14'>Judith 16. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_15'>ch. 14. 15</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN21_17'>John 21. 17</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_7'>1 Sam. 16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>, <a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_3'>Rom. 9. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_17'>Joel 2. 17</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_45'>2 Esdr. 8. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_26'>Deut. 9. 26</a>. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_23'>2 Sam. 7. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_13'>Jer. 31. 13</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_20'>John 16. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shut</span>, or, <span class='add'>stop not</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_9'>ch. 14. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG13_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>mightily</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>Baruch 4. 20</a>. See <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_24'>Isai. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_20'>Baruch 4. 20</a>. See <a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_1'>ch. 4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_16'>ch. 4. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_24'>Isai. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_3'>Ezra 9. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG12_3'>Judg. 12. 3</a>. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S119_5'>1 Sam. 19. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_21'>28. 21</a>. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB13_14'>Job 13. 14</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_109'>Ps. 119. 109</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_34'>Deut. 4. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_2'>Josh. 24. 2</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_11'>Judg. 2. 11–15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_15'>Ezra 9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_24'>1 Chr. 29. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. not as <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_17'>ch. 13. 17</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>vain</span> things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_8'>Judith 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>be not</span>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_11'>Ecclus. 38. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_9'>44. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_19'>Matt. 1. 19</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB6_6'>Heb. 6. 6</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK35_11'>Ezek. 35. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>gods</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_17'>2 Tim. 4. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_6'>ch. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_12'>ch. 13. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>every stranger</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>pride</span>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_12'>ch. 16. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_16"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_17'>ch. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_22'>Isai. 30. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>quiet</span>, or, <span class='add'>private</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_2'>Judith 12. 2</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_10'>Tobit 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>of my change</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_19"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_11'>Judith 9. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG14_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_5'>ch. 15. 5</a>. So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[To <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_16'>ver. 16</a>, substituted in the Greek for <a href='EST.xhtml#ET5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>, <a href='EST.xhtml#ET5_2'>2</a> of the Hebrew].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_2'>ch. 14. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR5_1'>Baruch 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_4'>ch. 16. 4</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_6'>Wisd. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_11'>Judith 9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_33'>Judith 8. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>delicately</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>rosecoloured</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as amiable</span>, or, <span class='add'>smiling</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_19'>ch. 14. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_7'>ver. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_33'>Judith 8. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>with her</span>, or, <span class='add'>by her</span>. Comp. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in an agony</span>. So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_1'>ch. 14. 1</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB5_20'>Tobit 5. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB7_16'>7. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB8_4'>8. 4</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB8_7'>7</a>. See <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_9'>Cant. 4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as well thine as mine</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_13"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S129_9'>1 Sam. 29. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>she fell in a swoon</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG15_15"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_7'>ver. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_24'>ver. 24</a>, Joseph. Antiq. lib. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_11'>11</a>. cap. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_6'>6</a>. [<a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_12'>12</a>.].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET1_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_1'>13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>well affected to our</span> state.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>their benefactors</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_2'>ch. 13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>needy</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>that never tasted prosperity</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_2'>ch. 15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of</span> our <span class='add'>friends, put in trust to manage the affairs</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_29'>Rom. 1. 29</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG12_6'>ch. 12. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG12_6'>ch. 12. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN45_8'>Gen. 45. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_6'>ch. 13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_12"><span class="notemark">j</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_16'>ch. 14. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_16"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E16_31'>1 Esdr. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_16"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_5'>Bel and Drag. 5</a>, <a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_24'>24</a>. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_33'>2 Macc. 7. 33</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_4'>15. 4</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS42_2'>Ps. 42. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>prospered</span>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_4'>ch. 13. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_17"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG12_6'>ch. 12. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_1'>ch. 3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET7_10'>ch. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_1'>Neh. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_10'>ch. 9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_9'>ch. 13. 9</a>. See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_21"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_21'>2 Esdr. 15. 21</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_53'>53</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_56'>56</a>. &amp; <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_73'>16. 73</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB8_15'>Tobit 8. 15</a> (Gk.). <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_9'>Wisd. 3. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_15'>4. 15</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_10'>Ecclus. 17. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>46. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_22'>47. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_13'>49. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EG16_24"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EST.xhtml#ET8_11'>ch. 8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

