<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Exodus 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Exodus</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='EX0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Second Book of Moses, called Exodus  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="EX1_1">1&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_2">2&#160;</span> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
<span class="verse" id="EX1_3">3&#160;</span> Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
<span class="verse" id="EX1_4">4&#160;</span> Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_5">5&#160;</span> And all the souls that came out of the <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>loins of Jacob were <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt <span class='add'>already</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_6">6&#160;</span> And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed exceeding mighty; and the land was filled with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_8">8&#160;</span> Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel <span class='add'>are</span> more and mightier than we:
<span class="verse" id="EX1_10">10&#160;</span> Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and <span class='add'>so</span> get them up out of the land.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Raamses.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_13">13&#160;</span> And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour:
<span class="verse" id="EX1_14">14&#160;</span> And they made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field: all their service, wherein they made them serve, <span class='add'>was</span> with rigour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah:
<span class="verse" id="EX1_16">16&#160;</span> And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see <span class='add'>them</span> upon the stools; if it <span class='add'>be</span> a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it <span class='add'>be</span> a daughter, then she shall live.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_17">17&#160;</span> But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_18">18&#160;</span> And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive?
<span class="verse" id="EX1_19">19&#160;</span> And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women <span class='add'>are</span> not as the Egyptian women; for they <span class='add'>are</span> lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_21">21&#160;</span> And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.
<span class="verse" id="EX1_22">22&#160;</span> And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_1">1&#160;</span> And there went <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a man of the house of Levi, and took <span class='add'>to wife</span> a daughter of Levi.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_2">2&#160;</span> And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he <span class='add'>was a</span> goodly <span class='add'>child</span>, she <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hid him three months.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_3">3&#160;</span> And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid <span class='add'>it</span> in the flags by the river’s brink.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_4">4&#160;</span> And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash <span class='add'>herself</span> at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river’s side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_6">6&#160;</span> And when she had opened <span class='add'>it</span>, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This <span class='add'>is one</span> of the Hebrews’ children.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_7">7&#160;</span> Then said his sister to Pharaoh’s daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
<span class="verse" id="EX2_8">8&#160;</span> And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child’s mother.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_9">9&#160;</span> And Pharaoh’s daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give <span class='add'>thee</span> thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_10">10&#160;</span> And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_12">12&#160;</span> And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that <span class='add'>there was</span> no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_13">13&#160;</span> And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow?
<span class="verse" id="EX2_14">14&#160;</span> And he said, Who made thee <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_15">15&#160;</span> Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_16">16&#160;</span> Now the <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew <span class='add'>water</span>, and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_17">17&#160;</span> And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_18">18&#160;</span> And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How <span class='add'>is it that</span> ye are come so soon to day?
<span class="verse" id="EX2_19">19&#160;</span> And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew <span class='add'>water</span> enough for us, and watered the flock.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_20">20&#160;</span> And he said unto his daughters, And where <span class='add'>is</span> he? why <span class='add'>is</span> it <span class='add'>that</span> ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat bread.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_21">21&#160;</span> And Moses was content to dwell with the man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_22">22&#160;</span> And she bare <span class='add'>him</span> a son, and he called his name <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_24">24&#160;</span> And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="EX2_25">25&#160;</span> And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>had respect unto <span class='add'>them</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_1">1&#160;</span> Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, <span class='add'>even</span> to Horeb.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_2">2&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto him in a <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush <span class='add'>was</span> not consumed.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_3">3&#160;</span> And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_4">4&#160;</span> And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_5">5&#160;</span> And he said, Draw not nigh hither: <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest <span class='add'>is</span> holy ground.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_6">6&#160;</span> Moreover he said, <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look upon God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which <span class='add'>are</span> in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows;
<span class="verse" id="EX3_8">8&#160;</span> And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_9">9&#160;</span> Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also seen the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppress them.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_10">10&#160;</span> Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto God, Who <span class='add'>am</span> I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
<span class="verse" id="EX3_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, Certainly I will be with thee; and this <span class='add'>shall be</span> a token unto thee, that I have sent thee: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_13">13&#160;</span> And Moses said unto God, Behold, <span class='add'>when</span> I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say to me, What <span class='add'>is</span> his name? what shall I say unto them?
<span class="verse" id="EX3_14">14&#160;</span> And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_15">15&#160;</span> And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this <span class='add'>is</span> my name for ever, and this <span class='add'>is</span> my memorial unto all generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_16">16&#160;</span> Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and <span class='add'>seen</span> that which is done to you in Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="EX3_17">17&#160;</span> And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_18">18&#160;</span> And they shall hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we beseech thee, three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>no, not by a mighty hand.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_20">20&#160;</span> And I will stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and after that he will let you go.
<span class="verse" id="EX3_21">21&#160;</span> And I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty:
<span class="verse" id="EX3_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But every woman shall borrow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put <span class='add'>them</span> upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shall spoil <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the Egyptians.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they will say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not appeared unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, What <span class='add'>is</span> that in thine hand? And he said, A rod.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_3">3&#160;</span> And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand:
<span class="verse" id="EX4_5">5&#160;</span> That they may believe that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he took it out, behold, his hand <span class='add'>was</span> leprous as snow.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_7">7&#160;</span> And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his <span class='add'>other</span> flesh.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_8">8&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour <span class='add'>it</span> upon the dry <span class='add'>land:</span> and the water which thou takest out of the river <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall become blood upon the dry <span class='add'>land</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O my Lord, I <span class='add'>am</span> not <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>eloquent, neither <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I <span class='add'>am</span> slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Who hath made man’s mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the blind? have not I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="EX4_12">12&#160;</span> Now therefore go, and I will be <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_13">13&#160;</span> And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand <span class='add'>of him whom</span> thou <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wilt send.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_14">14&#160;</span> And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against Moses, and he said, <span class='add'>Is</span> not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet thee: and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_16">16&#160;</span> And he shall be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shall be, <span class='add'>even</span> he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt be to him instead of God.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_17">17&#160;</span> And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which <span class='add'>are</span> in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_19">19&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for all the men are dead which sought thy life.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_20">20&#160;</span> And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_22">22&#160;</span> And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Israel <span class='add'>is</span> my son, <span class='add'>even</span> my firstborn:
<span class="verse" id="EX4_23">23&#160;</span> And I say unto thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will slay thy son, <span class='add'>even</span> thy firstborn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass by the way in the inn, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> met him, and sought to kill him.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_25">25&#160;</span> Then Zipporah took a sharp <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast <span class='add'>it</span> at his feet, and said, Surely a bloody husband <span class='add'>art</span> thou to me.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_26">26&#160;</span> So he let him go: then she said, A bloody husband <span class='add'>thou art</span>, because of the circumcision. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kissed him.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_28">28&#160;</span> And Moses told Aaron all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="EX4_30">30&#160;</span> And Aaron spake all the words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.
<span class="verse" id="EX4_31">31&#160;</span> And the people believed: and when they heard that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had visited the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_1">1&#160;</span> And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_2">2&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said, Who <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither will I let Israel go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_3">3&#160;</span> And they said, <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days’ journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_4">4&#160;</span> And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_5">5&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now <span class='add'>are</span> many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_6">6&#160;</span> And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX5_7">7&#160;</span> Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_8">8&#160;</span> And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish <span class='add'>ought</span> thereof: for they <span class='add'>be</span> idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go <span class='add'>and</span> sacrifice to our God.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard vain words.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_11">11&#160;</span> Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shall be diminished.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_12">12&#160;</span> So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble instead of straw.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_13">13&#160;</span> And the taskmasters hasted <span class='add'>them</span>, saying, Fulfil your works, <span class='add'>your</span> <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>daily tasks, as when there was straw.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_14">14&#160;</span> And the officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, <span class='add'>and</span> demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants?
<span class="verse" id="EX5_16">16&#160;</span> There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants <span class='add'>are</span> beaten; but the fault <span class='add'>is</span> in thine own people.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_17">17&#160;</span> But he said, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> idle, <span class='add'>ye are</span> idle: therefore ye say, Let us go <span class='add'>and</span> do sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_18">18&#160;</span> Go therefore now, <span class='add'>and</span> work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale of bricks.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_19">19&#160;</span> And the officers of the children of Israel did see <span class='add'>that</span> they <span class='add'>were</span> in evil <span class='add'>case</span>, after it was said, Ye shall not minish <span class='add'>ought</span> from your bricks of your daily task. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:
<span class="verse" id="EX5_21">21&#160;</span> And they said unto them, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> look upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.
<span class="verse" id="EX5_22">22&#160;</span> And Moses returned unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, Lord, wherefore hast thou <span class='add'>so</span> evil entreated this people? why <span class='add'>is</span> it <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast sent me?
<span class="verse" id="EX5_23">23&#160;</span> For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>neither hast thou delivered thy people at all.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_1">1&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shall he let them go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_2">2&#160;</span> And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_3">3&#160;</span> And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by <span class='add'>the name of</span> God Almighty, but by my name <span class='nd'>JEHOVAH</span> was I not known to them.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_4">4&#160;</span> And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_5">5&#160;</span> And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments:
<span class="verse" id="EX6_7">7&#160;</span> And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_8">8&#160;</span> And I will bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it you for an heritage: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_10">10&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX6_11">11&#160;</span> Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_12">12&#160;</span> And Moses spake before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who <span class='add'>am</span> of uncircumcised lips?
<span class="verse" id="EX6_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_14">14&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>be</span> the heads of their fathers’ houses: <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi: these <span class='add'>be</span> the families of Reuben.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Simeon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the sons of Levi according to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred thirty and seven years.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_17">17&#160;</span> The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_18">18&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred thirty and three years.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_19">19&#160;</span> And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Levi according to their generations.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_20">20&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Amram took him Jochebed his father’s sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred and thirty and seven years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_22">22&#160;</span> And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_23">23&#160;</span> And Aaron took him Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Naashon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_24">24&#160;</span> And the sons of Korah; Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Korhites.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_25">25&#160;</span> And Eleazar Aaron’s son took him <span class='add'>one</span> of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>she bare him Phinehas: these <span class='add'>are</span> the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_26">26&#160;</span> These <span class='add'>are</span> that Aaron and Moses, to whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_27">27&#160;</span> These <span class='add'>are</span> they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these <span class='add'>are</span> that Moses and Aaron. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the day <span class='add'>when</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt,
<span class="verse" id="EX6_29">29&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX6_30">30&#160;</span> And Moses said before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken unto me?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_2">2&#160;</span> Thou shalt speak all that I command thee: and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_3">3&#160;</span> And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_4">4&#160;</span> But Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, <span class='add'>and</span> my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_5">5&#160;</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded them, so did they.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_7">7&#160;</span> And Moses <span class='add'>was</span> fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX7_9">9&#160;</span> When Pharaoh shall speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> before Pharaoh, <span class='add'>and</span> it shall become a serpent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_11">11&#160;</span> Then Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_12">12&#160;</span> For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_13">13&#160;</span> And he hardened Pharaoh’s heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Pharaoh’s heart <span class='add'>is</span> hardened, he refuseth to let the people go.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_15">15&#160;</span> Get thee unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river’s brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt say unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_17">17&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, In this thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: behold, I will smite with the rod that <span class='add'>is</span> in mine hand upon the waters which <span class='add'>are</span> in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_18">18&#160;</span> And the fish that <span class='add'>is</span> in the river shall die, and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall lothe to drink of the water of the river. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pools of water, that they may become blood; and <span class='add'>that</span> there may be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in <span class='add'>vessels of</span> wood, and in <span class='add'>vessels of</span> stone.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_20">20&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron did so, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded; and he <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that <span class='add'>were</span> in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>waters that <span class='add'>were</span> in the river were turned to blood.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_21">21&#160;</span> And the fish that <span class='add'>was</span> in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_23">23&#160;</span> And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_24">24&#160;</span> And all the Egyptians digged round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.
<span class="verse" id="EX7_25">25&#160;</span> And seven days were fulfilled, after that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had smitten the river.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_2">2&#160;</span> And if thou refuse to let <span class='add'>them</span> go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs:
<span class="verse" id="EX8_3">3&#160;</span> And the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>kneadingtroughs:
<span class="verse" id="EX8_4">4&#160;</span> And the frogs shall come up both on thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_6">6&#160;</span> And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_9">9&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Pharaoh, <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Glory over me: <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when shall I intreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to destroy the frogs from thee and thy houses, <span class='add'>that</span> they may remain in the river only?
<span class="verse" id="EX8_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>To morrow. And he said, <span class='add'>Be it</span> according to thy word: that thou mayest know that <span class='add'>there is</span> none like unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_11">11&#160;</span> And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall remain in the river only.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_12">12&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and out of the fields.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_14">14&#160;</span> And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_15">15&#160;</span> But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_17">17&#160;</span> And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_18">18&#160;</span> And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_19">19&#160;</span> Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This <span class='add'>is</span> the finger of God: and Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_21">21&#160;</span> Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I will send <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>swarms <span class='add'>of flies</span> upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms <span class='add'>of flies</span>, and also the ground whereon they <span class='add'>are</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_22">22&#160;</span> And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms <span class='add'>of flies</span> shall be there; to the end thou mayest know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the midst of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_23">23&#160;</span> And I will put <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a division between my people and thy people: <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to morrow shall this sign be.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_24">24&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did so; and <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>there came a grievous swarm <span class='add'>of flies</span> into the house of Pharaoh, and <span class='add'>into</span> his servants’ houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>corrupted by reason of the swarm <span class='add'>of flies</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_26">26&#160;</span> And Moses said, It is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God: lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
<span class="verse" id="EX8_27">27&#160;</span> We will go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, as <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he shall command us.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_28">28&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God in the wilderness; only ye shall not go very far away: intreat for me.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_29">29&#160;</span> And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will intreat the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that the swarms <span class='add'>of flies</span> may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to morrow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_30">30&#160;</span> And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_31">31&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms <span class='add'>of flies</span> from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.
<span class="verse" id="EX8_32">32&#160;</span> And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_1">1&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_2">2&#160;</span> For if thou refuse to let <span class='add'>them</span> go, and wilt hold them still,
<span class="verse" id="EX9_3">3&#160;</span> Behold, the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is upon thy cattle which <span class='add'>is</span> in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: <span class='add'>there shall be</span> a very grievous murrain.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all <span class='add'>that is</span> the children’s of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall do this thing in the land.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_7">7&#160;</span> And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth <span class='add'>with</span> blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_10">10&#160;</span> And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth <span class='add'>with</span> blains upon man, and upon beast.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_11">11&#160;</span> And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken unto Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_14">14&#160;</span> For I will at this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that <span class='add'>there is</span> none like me in all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_15">15&#160;</span> For now I will stretch out my hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_16">16&#160;</span> And in very deed for <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>this <span class='add'>cause</span> have I <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>raised thee up, for to shew <span class='add'>in</span> thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_17">17&#160;</span> As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?
<span class="verse" id="EX9_18">18&#160;</span> Behold, to morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_19">19&#160;</span> Send therefore now, <span class='add'>and</span> gather thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field; <span class='add'>for upon</span> every man and beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_20">20&#160;</span> He that feared the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses:
<span class="verse" id="EX9_21">21&#160;</span> And he that <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>regarded not the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> left his servants and his cattle in the field.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_23">23&#160;</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_24">24&#160;</span> So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_25">25&#160;</span> And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that <span class='add'>was</span> in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_26">26&#160;</span> Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel <span class='add'>were</span>, was there no hail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this time: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> righteous, and I and my people <span class='add'>are</span> wicked.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_28">28&#160;</span> Intreat the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> (for <span class='add'>it is</span> enough) that there be no <span class='add'>more</span> <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_29">29&#160;</span> And Moses said unto him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; <span class='add'>and</span> the thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that the <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>earth <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_30">30&#160;</span> But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_31">31&#160;</span> And the flax and the barley was smitten: for the barley <span class='add'>was</span> in the ear, and the flax <span class='add'>was</span> bolled.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_32">32&#160;</span> But the wheat and the rie were not smitten: for they <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>not grown up.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_33">33&#160;</span> And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_34">34&#160;</span> And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
<span class="verse" id="EX9_35">35&#160;</span> And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Moses.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew these my signs before him:
<span class="verse" id="EX10_2">2&#160;</span> And that thou mayest tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son’s son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_3">3&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_4">4&#160;</span> Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to morrow will I bring the <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>locusts into thy coast:
<span class="verse" id="EX10_5">5&#160;</span> And they shall cover the <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>face of the earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field:
<span class="verse" id="EX10_6">6&#160;</span> And they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_7">7&#160;</span> And Pharaoh’s servants said unto him, How long shall this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?
<span class="verse" id="EX10_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God: <span class='add'>but</span> <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who <span class='add'>are</span> they that shall go?
<span class="verse" id="EX10_9">9&#160;</span> And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we <span class='add'>must hold</span> a feast unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_10">10&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Let the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be so with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look <span class='add'>to it;</span> for evil <span class='add'>is</span> before you.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_11">11&#160;</span> Not so: go now ye <span class='add'>that are</span> men, and serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for that ye did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, <span class='add'>even</span> all that the hail hath left.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_13">13&#160;</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all <span class='add'>that</span> night; <span class='add'>and</span> when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_14">14&#160;</span> And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the coasts of Egypt: very grievous <span class='add'>were they;</span> before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_15">15&#160;</span> For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there remained not any green thing in the trees, or in the herbs of the field, through all the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then Pharaoh <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and against you.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_17">17&#160;</span> Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and intreat the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, that he may take away from me this death only.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_18">18&#160;</span> And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_19">19&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> turned a mighty strong west wind, which took away the locusts, and <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in all the coasts of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_20">20&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hardened Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>even darkness <span class='add'>which</span> may be felt.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_22">22&#160;</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days:
<span class="verse" id="EX10_23">23&#160;</span> They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three days: <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your little ones also go with you.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_25">25&#160;</span> And Moses said, Thou must give <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>us also sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_26">26&#160;</span> Our cattle also shall go with us; there shall not an hoof be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God; and we know not with what we must serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, until we come thither. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_27">27&#160;</span>¶ But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let them go.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_28">28&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in <span class='add'>that</span> day thou seest my face thou shalt die.
<span class="verse" id="EX10_29">29&#160;</span> And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well, I will see thy face again no more.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX11_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Yet will I bring one plague <span class='add'>more</span> upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let <span class='add'>you</span> go, he shall surely thrust you out hence altogether.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_2">2&#160;</span> Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man borrow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses <span class='add'>was</span> very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX11_4">4&#160;</span> And Moses said, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="EX11_5">5&#160;</span> And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that <span class='add'>is</span> behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_6">6&#160;</span> And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_7">7&#160;</span> But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_8">8&#160;</span> And all these thy servants shall come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that follow thee: and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a great anger.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX11_10">10&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hardened Pharaoh’s heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX12_2">2&#160;</span> This month <span class='add'>shall be</span> unto you the beginning of months: it <span class='add'>shall be</span> the first month of the year to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Speak ye unto all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of this month they shall take to them every man a <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb, according to the house of <span class='add'>their</span> fathers, a lamb for an house:
<span class="verse" id="EX12_4">4&#160;</span> And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take <span class='add'>it</span> according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for the lamb.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_5">5&#160;</span> Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of the first year: ye shall take <span class='add'>it</span> out from the sheep, or from the goats:
<span class="verse" id="EX12_6">6&#160;</span> And ye shall keep it up until the fourteenth day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the evening.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_7">7&#160;</span> And they shall take of the blood, and strike <span class='add'>it</span> on the two side posts and on the upper door post of the houses, wherein they shall eat it.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_8">8&#160;</span> And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; <span class='add'>and</span> with bitter <span class='add'>herbs</span> they shall eat it.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_9">9&#160;</span> Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast <span class='add'>with</span> fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_10">10&#160;</span> And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And thus shall ye eat it; <span class='add'>with</span> your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste: it <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> passover.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_12">12&#160;</span> For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_13">13&#160;</span> And the blood shall be to you for a token upon the houses where ye <span class='add'>are:</span> and when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to destroy <span class='add'>you</span>, when I smite the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_14">14&#160;</span> And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> throughout your generations; ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_15">15&#160;</span> Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_16">16&#160;</span> And in the first day <span class='add'>there shall be</span> an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be an holy convocation to you; no manner of work shall be done in them, save <span class='add'>that</span> which every <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>man must eat, that only may be done of you.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_17">17&#160;</span> And ye shall observe <span class='add'>the feast of</span> unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_18">18&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>In the first <span class='add'>month</span>, on the fourteenth day of the month at even, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_19">19&#160;</span> Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_20">20&#160;</span> Ye shall eat nothing leavened; in all your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take you a <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb according to your families, and kill the passover.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip <span class='add'>it</span> in the blood that <span class='add'>is</span> in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blood that <span class='add'>is</span> in the bason; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the morning.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_23">23&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite <span class='add'>you</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_24">24&#160;</span> And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_25">25&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will give you, according as he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you, What mean ye by this service?
<span class="verse" id="EX12_27">27&#160;</span> That ye shall say, It <span class='add'>is</span> the sacrifice of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshipped.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_28">28&#160;</span> And the children of Israel went away, and did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_29">29&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And it came to pass, that at midnight the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that <span class='add'>was</span> in the <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dungeon; and all the firstborn of cattle.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_30">30&#160;</span> And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for <span class='add'>there was</span> not a house where <span class='add'>there was</span> not one dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, <span class='add'>and</span> get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as ye have said.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_32">32&#160;</span> Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bless me also.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_33">33&#160;</span> And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We <span class='add'>be</span> all dead <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_34">34&#160;</span> And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_35">35&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they borrowed of the Egyptians <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment:
<span class="verse" id="EX12_36">36&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them <span class='add'>such things as they required</span>. And they spoiled the Egyptians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_37">37&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot <span class='add'>that were</span> men, beside children.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_38">38&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, <span class='add'>even</span> very much cattle.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_39">39&#160;</span> And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_40">40&#160;</span>¶ Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>four hundred and thirty years.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_41">41&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went out from the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_42">42&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a night to be much observed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this <span class='add'>is</span> that night of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_43">43&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses and Aaron, This <span class='add'>is</span> the ordinance of the passover: There shall no stranger eat thereof:
<span class="verse" id="EX12_44">44&#160;</span> But every man’s servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_45">45&#160;</span> A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_46">46&#160;</span> In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house; <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neither shall ye break a bone thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_47">47&#160;</span> All the congregation of Israel shall <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>keep it.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_48">48&#160;</span> And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_49">49&#160;</span> One law shall be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_50">50&#160;</span> Thus did all the children of Israel; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
<span class="verse" id="EX12_51">51&#160;</span> And it came to pass the selfsame day, <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX13_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, <span class='add'>both</span> of man and of beast: it <span class='add'>is</span> mine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bondage; for by strength of hand the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought you out from this <span class='add'>place:</span> there shall no leavened bread be eaten.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_4">4&#160;</span> This day came ye out in the month Abib. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And it shall be when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_6">6&#160;</span> Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day <span class='add'>shall be</span> a feast to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_7">7&#160;</span> Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven days; and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, <span class='add'>This is done</span> because of that <span class='add'>which</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought thee out of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_10">10&#160;</span> Thou shalt therefore keep this ordinance in his season from year to year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it shall be when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he sware unto thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it thee,
<span class="verse" id="EX13_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> That thou shalt <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set apart unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males <span class='add'>shall be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_13">13&#160;</span> And every firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou shalt break his neck: and all the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redeem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And it shall be when thy son asketh thee <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in time to come, saying, What <span class='add'>is</span> this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage:
<span class="verse" id="EX13_15">15&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all that openeth the matrix, being males; but all the firstborn of my children I redeem.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_16">16&#160;</span> And it shall be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes: for by strength of hand the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought us forth out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not <span class='add'>through</span> the way of the land of the Philistines, although that <span class='add'>was</span> near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="EX13_18">18&#160;</span> But God led the people about, <span class='add'>through</span> the way of the wilderness of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>harnessed out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_19">19&#160;</span> And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones away hence with you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="EX13_21">21&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night:
<span class="verse" id="EX13_22">22&#160;</span> He took not away the pillar of the cloud by day, <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>nor the pillar of fire by night, <span class='add'>from</span> before the people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX14_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, over against Baal-zephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_3">3&#160;</span> For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They <span class='add'>are</span> entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them in.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_4">4&#160;</span> And I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, that he shall follow after them; and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And they did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
<span class="verse" id="EX14_6">6&#160;</span> And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him:
<span class="verse" id="EX14_7">7&#160;</span> And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an high hand.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_9">9&#160;</span> But the <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses <span class='add'>and</span> chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_11">11&#160;</span> And they said unto Moses, Because <span class='add'>there were</span> no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt?
<span class="verse" id="EX14_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>Is</span> not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For <span class='add'>it had been</span> better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he will shew to you to day: <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_14">14&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward:
<span class="verse" id="EX14_16">16&#160;</span> But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel shall go on dry <span class='add'>ground</span> through the midst of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_17">17&#160;</span> And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_18">18&#160;</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them:
<span class="verse" id="EX14_20">20&#160;</span> And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness <span class='add'>to them</span>, but it gave light by night <span class='add'>to these:</span> so that the one came not near the other all the night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_21">21&#160;</span> And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> caused the sea to go <span class='add'>back</span> by a strong east wind all that night, and made the sea dry <span class='add'>land</span>, and the waters were <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>divided.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_22">22&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry <span class='add'>ground:</span> and the waters <span class='add'>were</span> a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, <span class='add'>even</span> all Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_24">24&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that in the morning watch the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> looked unto the host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians,
<span class="verse" id="EX14_25">25&#160;</span> And took off their chariot wheels, <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fighteth for them against the Egyptians.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_27">27&#160;</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_28">28&#160;</span> And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, <span class='add'>and</span> all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>one of them.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_29">29&#160;</span> But the children of Israel walked upon dry <span class='add'>land</span> in the midst of the sea; and the waters <span class='add'>were</span> a wall unto them on their right hand, and on their left.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_30">30&#160;</span> Thus the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore.
<span class="verse" id="EX14_31">31&#160;</span> And Israel saw that great <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>work which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and believed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his servant Moses.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_1">1&#160;</span> Then sang <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and spake, saying, I will sing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_2">2&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he <span class='add'>is</span> my God, and I will prepare him an habitation; my father’s God, and I will exalt him.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a man of war: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his name.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_4">4&#160;</span> Pharaoh’s chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_5">5&#160;</span> The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_6">6&#160;</span> Thy right hand, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_7">7&#160;</span> And in the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth thy wrath, <span class='add'>which</span> consumed them as stubble.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_8">8&#160;</span> And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the floods stood upright as an heap, <span class='add'>and</span> the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_9">9&#160;</span> The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them; I will draw my sword, my hand shall <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>destroy them.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_10">10&#160;</span> Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_11">11&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> like unto thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, among the <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>gods? who <span class='add'>is</span> like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful <span class='add'>in</span> praises, doing wonders?
<span class="verse" id="EX15_12">12&#160;</span> Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_13">13&#160;</span> Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people <span class='add'> which</span> thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided <span class='add'>them</span> in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The people shall hear, <span class='add'>and</span> be afraid: sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_15">15&#160;</span> Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed; the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by the greatness of thine arm they shall be <span class='add'>as</span> still as a stone; till thy people pass over, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, till the people pass over, <span class='add'> which</span> thou hast purchased.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_17">17&#160;</span> Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, <span class='add'>in</span> the place, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>which</span> thou hast made for thee to dwell in, <span class='add'>in</span> the Sanctuary, O Lord, <span class='add'>which</span> thy hands have established.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_18">18&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall reign for ever and ever.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_19">19&#160;</span> For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry <span class='add'>land</span> in the midst of the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_21">21&#160;</span> And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_22">22&#160;</span> So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they <span class='add'>were</span> bitter: therefore the name of it was called <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Marah.
<span class="verse" id="EX15_24">24&#160;</span> And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
<span class="verse" id="EX15_25">25&#160;</span> And he cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shewed him a <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tree, <span class='add'>which</span> when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them,
<span class="verse" id="EX15_26">26&#160;</span> And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that healeth thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_27">27&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And they came to Elim, where <span class='add'>were</span> twelve wells of water, and threescore and ten palm trees: and they encamped there by the waters.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_1">1&#160;</span> And they took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wilderness of Sin, which <span class='add'>is</span> between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_2">2&#160;</span> And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness:
<span class="verse" id="EX16_3">3&#160;</span> And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, <span class='add'>and</span> when we did eat bread to the full; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or no.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_5">5&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, that on the sixth day they shall prepare <span class='add'>that</span> which they bring in; and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath brought you out from the land of Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="EX16_7">7&#160;</span> And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for that he heareth your murmurings against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and what <span class='add'>are</span> we, that ye murmur against us?
<span class="verse" id="EX16_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses said, <span class='add'>This shall be</span>, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what <span class='add'>are</span> we? your murmurings <span class='add'>are</span> not against us, but against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he hath heard your murmurings.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>appeared in the cloud. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX16_12">12&#160;</span> I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_13">13&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that at even <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_14">14&#160;</span> And when <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness <span class='add'>there lay</span> a small round thing, <span class='add'>as</span> small as the hoar frost on the ground.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_15">15&#160;</span> And when the children of Israel saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they said one to another, <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>It <span class='add'>is</span> manna: for they wist not what it <span class='add'>was</span>. And Moses said unto them, <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>This <span class='add'>is</span> the bread which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given you to eat.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_16">16&#160;</span>¶ This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for every man, <span class='add'>according to</span> the number of your <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>persons; take ye every man for <span class='add'>them</span> which <span class='add'>are</span> in his tents.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_17">17&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_18">18&#160;</span> And when they did mete <span class='add'>it</span> with an omer, <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_19">19&#160;</span> And Moses said, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_20">20&#160;</span> Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_21">21&#160;</span> And they gathered it every morning, every man according to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one <span class='add'>man:</span> and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_23">23&#160;</span> And he said unto them, This <span class='add'>is that</span> which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said, To morrow <span class='add'>is</span> the rest of the holy sabbath unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: bake <span class='add'>that</span> which ye will bake <span class='add'>to day</span>, and seethe that ye will seethe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_24">24&#160;</span> And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_25">25&#160;</span> And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day <span class='add'>is</span> a sabbath unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: to day ye shall not find it in the field.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_26">26&#160;</span> Six days ye shall gather it; but on the seventh day, <span class='add'>which is</span> the sabbath, in it there shall be none. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> there went out <span class='add'>some</span> of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_28">28&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?
<span class="verse" id="EX16_29">29&#160;</span> See, for that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given you the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_30">30&#160;</span> So the people rested on the seventh day.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_31">31&#160;</span> And the house of Israel called the name thereof Manna: and it <span class='add'>was</span> like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it <span class='add'>was</span> like wafers <span class='add'>made</span> with honey. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said, This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commandeth, Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_33">33&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to be kept for your generations.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_34">34&#160;</span> As the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_35">35&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did eat manna forty years, <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat manna, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="EX16_36">36&#160;</span> Now an omer <span class='add'>is</span> the tenth <span class='add'>part</span> of an ephah.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_1">1&#160;</span> And all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys, according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and pitched in Rephidim: and <span class='add'>there was</span> no water for the people to drink.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_2">2&#160;</span> Wherefore <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="EX17_3">3&#160;</span> And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?
<span class="verse" id="EX17_4">4&#160;</span> And Moses cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, What shall I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_7">7&#160;</span> And he called the name of the place <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Massah, and <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Is the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> among us, or not?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_8">8&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_9">9&#160;</span> And Moses said unto <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_10">10&#160;</span> So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_12">12&#160;</span> But Moses’ hands <span class='add'>were</span> heavy; and they took a stone, and put <span class='add'>it</span> under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_13">13&#160;</span> And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Write this <span class='add'>for</span> a memorial in a book, and rehearse <span class='add'>it</span> in the ears of Joshua: for <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
<span class="verse" id="EX17_15">15&#160;</span> And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jehovah-nissi:<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_16">16&#160;</span> For he said, <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Because <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sworn <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>will have</span> war with Amalek from generation to generation.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_1">1&#160;</span> When <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father in law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, <span class='add'>and</span> that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had brought Israel out of Egypt;
<span class="verse" id="EX18_2">2&#160;</span> Then Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her back,
<span class="verse" id="EX18_3">3&#160;</span> And her two sons; of which the <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Gershom; for he said, I have been an alien in a strange land:
<span class="verse" id="EX18_4">4&#160;</span> And the name of the other <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Eliezer; for the God of my father, <span class='add'>said he, was</span> mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh:
<span class="verse" id="EX18_5">5&#160;</span> And Jethro, Moses’ father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mount of God:
<span class="verse" id="EX18_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and they asked each other of <span class='add'>their</span> <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>welfare; and they came into the tent.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses told his father in law all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, <span class='add'>and</span> all the travail that had <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>come upon them by the way, and <span class='add'>how</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered them.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_9">9&#160;</span> And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had done to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_10">10&#160;</span> And Jethro said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_11">11&#160;</span> Now I know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> greater than all gods: <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly <span class='add'>he was</span> above them.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_12">12&#160;</span> And Jethro, Moses’ father in law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses’ father in law before God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_14">14&#160;</span> And when Moses’ father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What <span class='add'>is</span> this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even?
<span class="verse" id="EX18_15">15&#160;</span> And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of God:
<span class="verse" id="EX18_16">16&#160;</span> When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>one and another, and I do make <span class='add'>them</span> know the statutes of God, and his laws.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_17">17&#160;</span> And Moses’ father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest <span class='add'>is</span> not good.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that <span class='add'>is</span> with thee: for this thing <span class='add'>is</span> too heavy for thee; <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_19">19&#160;</span> Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God:
<span class="verse" id="EX18_20">20&#160;</span> And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_21">21&#160;</span> Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place <span class='add'>such</span> over them, <span class='add'>to be</span> rulers of thousands, <span class='add'>and</span> rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:
<span class="verse" id="EX18_22">22&#160;</span> And let them judge the people at all seasons: and it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> every great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear <span class='add'>the burden</span> with thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_23">23&#160;</span> If thou shalt do this thing, and God command thee <span class='add'>so</span>, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_24">24&#160;</span> So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had said.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_25">25&#160;</span> And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.
<span class="verse" id="EX18_26">26&#160;</span> And they judged the people at all seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_1">1&#160;</span> In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they <span class='add'>into</span> the wilderness of Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_2">2&#160;</span> For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come <span class='add'>to</span> the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and there Israel camped before the mount.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_3">3&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses went up unto God, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="EX19_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and <span class='add'>how</span> I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto myself.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_5">5&#160;</span> Now <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: for <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the earth <span class='add'>is</span> mine:
<span class="verse" id="EX19_6">6&#160;</span> And ye shall be unto me a <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These <span class='add'>are</span> the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_8">8&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the people answered together, and said, All that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the people unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes,
<span class="verse" id="EX19_11">11&#160;</span> And be ready against the third day: for the third day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, <span class='add'>that ye</span> go <span class='add'>not</span> up into the mount, or touch the border of it: <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death:
<span class="verse" id="EX19_13">13&#160;</span> There shall not an hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; whether <span class='add'>it be</span> beast or man, it shall not live: when the <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_15">15&#160;</span> And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at <span class='add'>your</span> wives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that <span class='add'>was</span> in the camp trembled.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_17">17&#160;</span> And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_18">18&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_19">19&#160;</span> And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called Moses <span class='add'>up</span> to the top of the mount; and Moses went up.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Go down, <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>charge the people, lest they break through unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to gaze, and many of them perish.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_22">22&#160;</span> And let the priests also, which come near to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, sanctify themselves, lest the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> break forth upon them.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_23">23&#160;</span> And Moses said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_24">24&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Away, get thee down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, lest he break forth upon them.
<span class="verse" id="EX19_25">25&#160;</span> So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_1">1&#160;</span> And God spake all these words, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX20_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bondage.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_3">3&#160;</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness <span class='add'>of any thing</span> that <span class='add'>is</span> in heaven above, or that <span class='add'>is</span> in the earth beneath, or that <span class='add'>is</span> in the water under the earth:
<span class="verse" id="EX20_5">5&#160;</span> Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>am</span> a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth <span class='add'>generation</span> of them that hate me;
<span class="verse" id="EX20_6">6&#160;</span> And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt not take the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in vain; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_8">8&#160;</span> Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work:
<span class="verse" id="EX20_10">10&#160;</span> But the seventh day <span class='add'>is</span> the sabbath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: <span class='add'>in it</span> thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> within thy gates:
<span class="verse" id="EX20_11">11&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>in</span> six days the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them <span class='add'>is</span>, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God giveth thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt not kill.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt not commit adultery.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_15">15&#160;</span> Thou shalt not steal.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_16">16&#160;</span> Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that <span class='add'>is</span> thy neighbour’s. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they removed, and stood afar off.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_19">19&#160;</span> And they said unto Moses, <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_20">20&#160;</span> And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_21">21&#160;</span> And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God <span class='add'>was</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_23">23&#160;</span> Ye shall not make with me gods of silver, neither shall ye make unto you gods of gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_24">24&#160;</span>¶ An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen: in all places where I record my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_25">25&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.
<span class="verse" id="EX20_26">26&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the judgments which thou shalt set before them.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_3">3&#160;</span> If he came in <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_4">4&#160;</span> If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_5">5&#160;</span> And if the servant <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free:
<span class="verse" id="EX21_6">6&#160;</span> Then his master shall bring him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and he shall serve him for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And if a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out as the menservants do.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_8">8&#160;</span> If she <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath dealt deceitfully with her.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_9">9&#160;</span> And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_10">10&#160;</span> If he take him another <span class='add'>wife;</span> her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_11">11&#160;</span> And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free without money. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_13">13&#160;</span> And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver <span class='add'>him</span> into his hand; then <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will appoint thee a place whither he shall flee.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_14">14&#160;</span> But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall be surely put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he that <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And if men strive together, and one smite <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>another with a stone, or with <span class='add'>his</span> fist, and he die not, but keepeth <span class='add'>his</span> bed:
<span class="verse" id="EX21_19">19&#160;</span> If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that smote <span class='add'>him</span> be quit: only he shall pay <span class='add'>for</span> <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the loss of his time, and shall cause <span class='add'>him</span> to be thoroughly healed.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shall be surely <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punished.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_21">21&#160;</span> Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he <span class='add'>is</span> his money. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_22">22&#160;</span>¶ If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart <span class='add'>from her</span>, and yet no mischief follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman’s husband will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges <span class='add'>determine</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_23">23&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>any</span> mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for life,
<span class="verse" id="EX21_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
<span class="verse" id="EX21_25">25&#160;</span> Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shall let him go free for his eye’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_27">27&#160;</span> And if he smite out his manservant’s tooth, or his maidservant’s tooth; he shall let him go free for his tooth’s sake. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_28">28&#160;</span>¶ If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox <span class='add'>shall be</span> quit.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_29">29&#160;</span> But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath killed a man or a woman; the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_30">30&#160;</span> If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_31">31&#160;</span> Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done unto him.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_32">32&#160;</span> If the ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant; he shall give unto their master thirty shekels <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of silver, and the ox shall be stoned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall therein;
<span class="verse" id="EX21_34">34&#160;</span> The owner of the pit shall make <span class='add'>it</span> good, <span class='add'>and</span> give money unto the owner of them; and the dead <span class='add'>beast</span> shall be his. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And if one man’s ox hurt another’s, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead <span class='add'>ox</span> also they shall divide.
<span class="verse" id="EX21_36">36&#160;</span> Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_1">1&#160;</span> If a man shall steal an ox, or a <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>four sheep for a sheep.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_2">2&#160;</span>¶ If a thief be found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, <span class='add'>there shall</span> no blood <span class='add'>be shed</span> for him.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_3">3&#160;</span> If the sun be risen upon him, <span class='add'>there shall be</span> blood <span class='add'>shed</span> for him; <span class='add'>for</span> he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_4">4&#160;</span> If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore double. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_5">5&#160;</span>¶ If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man’s field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall he make restitution. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_6">6&#160;</span>¶ If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed <span class='add'>therewith;</span> he that kindled the fire shall surely make restitution. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_7">7&#160;</span>¶ If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man’s house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_8">8&#160;</span> If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, <span class='add'>to see</span> whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_9">9&#160;</span> For all manner of trespass, <span class='add'>whether it be</span> for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, <span class='add'>or</span> for any manner of lost thing, which <span class='add'>another</span> challengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; <span class='add'>and</span> whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_10">10&#160;</span> If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing <span class='add'>it:</span>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> shall an oath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour’s goods; and the owner of it shall accept <span class='add'>thereof</span>, and he shall not make <span class='add'>it</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_12">12&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_13">13&#160;</span> If it be torn in pieces, <span class='add'>then</span> let him bring it <span class='add'>for</span> witness, <span class='add'>and</span> he shall not make good that which was torn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And if a man borrow <span class='add'>ought</span> of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof <span class='add'>being</span> not with it, he shall surely make <span class='add'>it</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> if the owner thereof <span class='add'>be</span> with it, he shall not make <span class='add'>it</span> good: if it <span class='add'>be</span> an hired <span class='add'>thing</span>, it came for his hire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his wife.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_17">17&#160;</span> If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pay money according to the dowry of virgins.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He that sacrificeth unto <span class='add'>any</span> god, save unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> only, he shall be utterly destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_21">21&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_23">23&#160;</span> If thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry;
<span class="verse" id="EX22_24">24&#160;</span> And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_25">25&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If thou lend money to <span class='add'>any of</span> my people <span class='add'>that is</span> poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_26">26&#160;</span> If thou at all take thy neighbour’s raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down:
<span class="verse" id="EX22_27">27&#160;</span>For that <span class='add'>is</span> his covering only, it <span class='add'>is</span> his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I <span class='add'>am</span> gracious. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_28">28&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not revile the <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not delay <span class='add'>to offer</span> <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>liquors: <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.
<span class="verse" id="EX22_30">30&#160;</span> Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, <span class='add'>and</span> with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And ye shall be holy men unto me: <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neither shall ye eat <span class='add'>any</span> flesh <span class='add'>that is</span> torn of beasts in the field; ye shall cast it to the dogs.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_1">1&#160;</span> Thou shalt not <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_2">2&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not follow a multitude to <span class='add'>do</span> evil; neither shalt thou <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest <span class='add'>judgment:</span></div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man in his cause. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_4">4&#160;</span>¶ If thou meet thine enemy’s ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under his burden, <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_6">6&#160;</span> Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_7">7&#160;</span> Keep thee far from a false matter; and the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the wicked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger: for ye know the <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof:
<span class="verse" id="EX23_11">11&#160;</span> But the seventh <span class='add'>year</span> thou shalt let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, <span class='add'>and</span> with thy <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oliveyard.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_13">13&#160;</span>And in all <span class='add'>things</span> that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Three times thou shalt keep a feast unto me in the year.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and none shall appear before me empty:)
<span class="verse" id="EX23_16">16&#160;</span> And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, <span class='add'>which is</span> in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_17">17&#160;</span> Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_18">18&#160;</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sacrifice remain until the morning.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother’s milk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_21">21&#160;</span> Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name <span class='add'>is</span> in him.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_22">22&#160;</span> But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>adversary unto thine adversaries.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For mine Angel shall go before thee, and <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I will cut them off.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_24">24&#160;</span> Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but thou shalt utterly overthrow them, and quite break down their images.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_25">25&#160;</span> And ye shall serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_26">26&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land: the number of thy days I will fulfil.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_27">27&#160;</span> I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>backs unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_28">28&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_29">29&#160;</span> I will not drive them out from before thee in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_30">30&#160;</span> By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_31">31&#160;</span> And I will set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
<span class="verse" id="EX23_33">33&#160;</span> They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it will surely be a snare unto thee.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_1">1&#160;</span> And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar off.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_2">2&#160;</span> And Moses alone shall come near the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Moses came and told the people all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and all the judgments: and all the people answered with one voice, and said, <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All the words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said will we do.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_4">4&#160;</span> And Moses wrote all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_5">5&#160;</span> And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses took half of the blood, and put <span class='add'>it</span> in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_7">7&#160;</span> And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said will we do, and be obedient.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled <span class='add'>it</span> on the people, and said, Behold <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the blood of the covenant, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made with you concerning all these words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="EX24_10">10&#160;</span> And they saw the God of Israel: and <span class='add'>there was</span> under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in <span class='add'>his</span> clearness.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_11">11&#160;</span> And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayest teach them.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_13">13&#160;</span> And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_14">14&#160;</span> And he said unto the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur <span class='add'>are</span> with you: if any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_15">15&#160;</span> And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_16">16&#160;</span> And the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_17">17&#160;</span> And the sight of the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX24_18">18&#160;</span> And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX25_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, that they <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bring me an <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offering: <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_3">3&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the offering which ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass,
<span class="verse" id="EX25_4">4&#160;</span> And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fine linen, and goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span>,
<span class="verse" id="EX25_5">5&#160;</span> And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,
<span class="verse" id="EX25_6">6&#160;</span> Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for sweet incense,
<span class="verse" id="EX25_7">7&#160;</span> Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ephod, and in the <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>breastplate.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_8">8&#160;</span> And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_9">9&#160;</span> According to all that I shew thee, <span class='add'>after</span> the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And they shall make an ark <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood: two cubits and a half <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put <span class='add'>them</span> in the four corners thereof; and two rings <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_13">13&#160;</span> And thou shalt make staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_15">15&#160;</span> The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_17">17&#160;</span> And thou shalt make a mercy seat <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold: two cubits and a half <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_18">18&#160;</span> And thou shalt make two cherubims <span class='add'>of</span> gold, <span class='add'>of</span> beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_19">19&#160;</span> And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_20">20&#160;</span> And the cherubims shall stretch forth <span class='add'>their</span> wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces <span class='add'>shall look</span> one to another; toward the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubims be.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_21">21&#160;</span> And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_22">22&#160;</span> And there I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>between the two cherubims which <span class='add'>are</span> upon the ark of the testimony, of all <span class='add'>things</span> which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_23">23&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt also make a table <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood: two cubits <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_24">24&#160;</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_25">25&#160;</span> And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_26">26&#160;</span> And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that <span class='add'>are</span> on the four feet thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_27">27&#160;</span> Over against the border shall the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_28">28&#160;</span> And thou shalt make the staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_29">29&#160;</span> And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spoons thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to cover withal: <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold shalt thou make them.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_30">30&#160;</span> And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_31">31&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And thou shalt make a candlestick <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold: <span class='add'>of</span> beaten work shall the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the same.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_32">32&#160;</span> And six branches shall come out of the sides of it; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side:
<span class="verse" id="EX25_33">33&#160;</span> Three bowls made like unto almonds, <span class='add'>with</span> a knop and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch, <span class='add'>with</span> a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_34">34&#160;</span> And in the candlestick <span class='add'>shall be</span> four bowls made like unto almonds, <span class='add'>with</span> their knops and their flowers.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_35">35&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there shall be</span> a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_36">36&#160;</span> Their knops and their branches shall be of the same: all it <span class='add'>shall be</span> one beaten work <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_37">37&#160;</span> And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shall <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_38">38&#160;</span> And the tongs thereof, and the snuffdishes thereof, <span class='add'>shall be of</span> pure gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Of</span> a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels.
<span class="verse" id="EX25_40">40&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>look that thou make <span class='add'>them</span> after their pattern, <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which was shewed thee in the mount.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle <span class='add'>with</span> ten curtains <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: <span class='add'>with</span> cherubims <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of cunning work shalt thou make them.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_2">2&#160;</span> The length of one curtain <span class='add'>shall be</span> eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shall have one measure.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_3">3&#160;</span> The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and <span class='add'>other</span> five curtains <span class='add'>shall be</span> coupled one to another.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_4">4&#160;</span> And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of <span class='add'>another</span> curtain, in the coupling of the second.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_5">5&#160;</span> Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that <span class='add'>is</span> in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of another.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make curtains <span class='add'>of</span> goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span> to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_8">8&#160;</span> The length of one curtain <span class='add'>shall be</span> thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>curtains <span class='add'>shall be all</span> of one measure.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain <span class='add'>that is</span> outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple the <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>tent together, that it may be one.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_12">12&#160;</span> And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_13">13&#160;</span> And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt make a covering for the tent <span class='add'>of</span> rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering above <span class='add'>of</span> badgers’ skins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood standing up.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_16">16&#160;</span> Ten cubits <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length of a board, and a cubit and a half <span class='add'>shall be</span> the breadth of one board.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_17">17&#160;</span> Two <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tenons <span class='add'>shall there be</span> in one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_18">18&#160;</span> And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_19">19&#160;</span> And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_20">20&#160;</span> And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side <span class='add'>there shall be</span> twenty boards:
<span class="verse" id="EX26_21">21&#160;</span> And their forty sockets <span class='add'>of</span> silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_22">22&#160;</span> And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_23">23&#160;</span> And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_24">24&#160;</span> And they shall be <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>coupled together beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_25">25&#160;</span> And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets <span class='add'>of</span> silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make bars <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
<span class="verse" id="EX26_27">27&#160;</span> And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_28">28&#160;</span> And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_29">29&#160;</span> And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings <span class='add'>of</span> gold <span class='add'>for</span> places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_30">30&#160;</span> And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>according to the fashion thereof which was shewed thee in the mount. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make a vail <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
<span class="verse" id="EX26_32">32&#160;</span> And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim <span class='add'>wood</span> overlaid with gold: their hooks <span class='add'>shall be of</span> gold, upon the four sockets of silver. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shall divide unto you between the holy <span class='add'>place</span> and the most holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_34">34&#160;</span> And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy <span class='add'>place</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_35">35&#160;</span> And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_36">36&#160;</span> And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework.
<span class="verse" id="EX26_37">37&#160;</span> And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars <span class='add'>of</span> shittim <span class='add'>wood</span>, and overlay them with gold, <span class='add'>and</span> their hooks <span class='add'>shall be of</span> gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_1">1&#160;</span> And thou shalt make an altar <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> three cubits.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_2">2&#160;</span> And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the vessels thereof thou shalt make <span class='add'>of</span> brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_4">4&#160;</span> And thou shalt make for it a grate of network <span class='add'>of</span> brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_5">5&#160;</span> And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the altar.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlay them with brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_7">7&#160;</span> And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_8">8&#160;</span> Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it was shewed thee in the mount, so shall they make <span class='add'>it</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward <span class='add'>there shall be</span> hangings for the court <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side:
<span class="verse" id="EX27_10">10&#160;</span> And the twenty pillars thereof and their twenty sockets <span class='add'>shall be of</span> brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets <span class='add'>shall be of</span> silver.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_11">11&#160;</span> And likewise for the north side in length <span class='add'>there shall be</span> hangings of an hundred <span class='add'>cubits</span> long, and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets <span class='add'>of</span> brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets <span class='add'>of</span> silver. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>for</span> the breadth of the court on the west side <span class='add'>shall be</span> hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_13">13&#160;</span> And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward <span class='add'>shall be</span> fifty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_14">14&#160;</span> The hangings of one side <span class='add'>of the gate shall be</span> fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_15">15&#160;</span> And on the other side <span class='add'>shall be</span> hangings fifteen <span class='add'>cubits:</span> their pillars three, and their sockets three. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And for the gate of the court <span class='add'>shall be</span> an hanging of twenty cubits, <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: <span class='add'>and</span> their pillars <span class='add'>shall be</span> four, and their sockets four.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_17">17&#160;</span> All the pillars round about the court <span class='add'>shall be</span> filleted with silver; their hooks <span class='add'>shall be of</span> silver, and their sockets <span class='add'>of</span> brass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The length of the court <span class='add'>shall be</span> an hundred cubits, and the breadth <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fifty every where, and the height five cubits <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen, and their sockets <span class='add'>of</span> brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_19">19&#160;</span> All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, <span class='add'>shall be of</span> brass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to burn always.
<span class="verse" id="EX27_21">21&#160;</span> In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which <span class='add'>is</span> before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_1">1&#160;</span> And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office, <span class='add'>even</span> Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_2">2&#160;</span> And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak unto all <span class='add'>that are</span> wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron’s garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_4">4&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_5">5&#160;</span> And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And they shall make the ephod <span class='add'>of</span> gold, <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and <span class='add'>of</span> purple, <span class='add'>of</span> scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_7">7&#160;</span> It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and <span class='add'>so</span> it shall be joined together.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_8">8&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>curious girdle of the ephod, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work thereof; <span class='add'>even of</span> gold, <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="EX28_10">10&#160;</span> Six of their names on one stone, and <span class='add'>the other</span> six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> With the work of an engraver in stone, <span class='add'>like</span> the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod <span class='add'>for</span> stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> upon his two shoulders for a memorial. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make ouches <span class='add'>of</span> gold;
<span class="verse" id="EX28_14">14&#160;</span> And two chains <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold at the ends; <span class='add'>of</span> wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; <span class='add'>of</span> gold, <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and <span class='add'>of</span> purple, and <span class='add'>of</span> scarlet, and <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen, shalt thou make it.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_16">16&#160;</span> Foursquare it shall be <span class='add'>being</span> doubled; a span <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length thereof, and a span <span class='add'>shall be</span> the breadth thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_17">17&#160;</span> And thou shalt <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set in it settings of stones, <span class='add'>even</span> four rows of stones: <span class='add'>the first</span> row <span class='add'>shall be</span> a <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: <span class='add'>this shall be</span> the first row.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_18">18&#160;</span> And the second row <span class='add'>shall be</span> an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_19">19&#160;</span> And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_20">20&#160;</span> And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>inclosings.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_21">21&#160;</span> And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, <span class='add'>like</span> the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve tribes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends <span class='add'>of</span> wreathen work <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_23">23&#160;</span> And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_24">24&#160;</span> And thou shalt put the two wreathen <span class='add'>chains</span> of gold in the two rings <span class='add'>which are</span> on the ends of the breastplate.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_25">25&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>the other</span> two ends of the two wreathen <span class='add'>chains</span> thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put <span class='add'>them</span> on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the side of the ephod inward.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_27">27&#160;</span> And two <span class='add'>other</span> rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the <span class='add'>other</span> coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_28">28&#160;</span> And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that <span class='add'>it</span> may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_29">29&#160;</span> And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, for a memorial before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all <span class='add'>of</span> blue.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_32">32&#160;</span> And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>beneath</span> upon the <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and <span class='add'>of</span> purple, and <span class='add'>of</span> scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:
<span class="verse" id="EX28_34">34&#160;</span> A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy <span class='add'>place</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and when he cometh out, that he die not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt make a plate <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold, and grave upon it, <span class='add'>like</span> the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_37">37&#160;</span> And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_38">38&#160;</span> And it shall be upon Aaron’s forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre <span class='add'>of</span> fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle <span class='add'>of</span> needlework. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_40">40&#160;</span>¶ And for Aaron’s sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_41">41&#160;</span> And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="EX28_42">42&#160;</span> And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>reach:
<span class="verse" id="EX28_43">43&#160;</span> And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy <span class='add'>place;</span> that they bear not iniquity, and die: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever unto him and his seed after him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_1">1&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow them, to minister unto me in the priest’s office: <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,
<span class="verse" id="EX29_2">2&#160;</span> And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: <span class='add'>of</span> wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_4">4&#160;</span> And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_5">5&#160;</span> And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod:
<span class="verse" id="EX29_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_7">7&#160;</span> Then shalt thou take the anointing <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>oil, and pour <span class='add'>it</span> upon his head, and anoint him.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>put the bonnets on them: and the priest’s office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>consecrate Aaron and his sons.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt kill the bullock before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>by</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_13">13&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the caul <span class='add'>that is</span> above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon them, and burn <span class='add'>them</span> upon the altar.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_14">14&#160;</span> But the flesh of the bullock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it <span class='add'>is</span> a sin offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blood, and sprinkle <span class='add'>it</span> round about upon the altar.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_17">17&#160;</span> And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put <span class='add'>them</span> unto his pieces, and <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unto his head.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_18">18&#160;</span> And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it <span class='add'>is</span> a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_20">20&#160;</span> Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_21">21&#160;</span> And thou shalt take of the blood that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle <span class='add'>it</span> upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_22">22&#160;</span> Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul <span class='add'>above</span> the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon them, and the right shoulder; for it <span class='add'>is</span> a ram of consecration:
<span class="verse" id="EX29_23">23&#160;</span> And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that <span class='add'>is</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="EX29_24">24&#160;</span> And thou shalt put all in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wave them <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_25">25&#160;</span> And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn <span class='add'>them</span> upon the altar for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_26">26&#160;</span> And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron’s <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>consecration, and wave it <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and it shall be thy part.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_27">27&#160;</span> And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the shoulder of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, <span class='add'>even</span> of <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> for Aaron, and of <span class='add'>that</span> which is for his sons:
<span class="verse" id="EX29_28">28&#160;</span> And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’ by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it <span class='add'>is</span> an heave offering: and it shall be an heave offering from the children of Israel of the sacrifice of their peace offerings, <span class='add'>even</span> their heave offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons’ after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_32">32&#160;</span> And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bread that <span class='add'>is</span> in the basket, <span class='add'>by</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_33">33&#160;</span> And they shall eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate <span class='add'>and</span> to sanctify them: but a stranger shall not eat <span class='add'>thereof</span>, because they <span class='add'>are</span> holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_34">34&#160;</span> And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it <span class='add'>is</span> holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_35">35&#160;</span> And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, according to all <span class='add'>things</span> which I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_36">36&#160;</span> And thou shalt offer every day a bullock <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_37">37&#160;</span> Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shall be holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_38">38&#160;</span>¶ Now this <span class='add'>is that</span> which thou shalt offer upon the altar; <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>two lambs of the first year day by day continually.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_39">39&#160;</span> The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:
<span class="verse" id="EX29_40">40&#160;</span> And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine <span class='add'>for</span> a drink offering.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_41">41&#160;</span> And the other lamb thou shalt offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet savour, an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='add'>This shall be</span> a continual burnt offering throughout your generations <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: where I will meet you, to speak there unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_43">43&#160;</span> And there I will meet with the children of Israel, and <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>the tabernacle</span> shall be sanctified by my glory.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_44">44&#160;</span> And I will sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest’s office. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_45">45&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God.
<span class="verse" id="EX29_46">46&#160;</span> And they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell among them: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_1">1&#160;</span> And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood shalt thou make it.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_2">2&#160;</span> A cubit <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shall it be: and two cubits <span class='add'>shall be</span> the height thereof: the horns thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> of the same.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>top thereof, and the <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_4">4&#160;</span> And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make <span class='add'>it;</span> and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_5">5&#160;</span> And thou shalt make the staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt put it before the vail that <span class='add'>is</span> by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that <span class='add'>is</span> over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_7">7&#160;</span> And Aaron shall burn thereon <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sweet incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_8">8&#160;</span> And when Aaron <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lighteth the lamps <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at even, he shall burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> throughout your generations.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_9">9&#160;</span> Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_10">10&#160;</span> And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blood of the sin offering of atonements: once in the year shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX30_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their number, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when <span class='add'>thou</span> numberest them.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_13">13&#160;</span> This they shall give, every one that passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (<a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a shekel <span class='add'>is</span> twenty gerahs:) an half shekel <span class='add'>shall be</span> the offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_14">14&#160;</span> Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_15">15&#160;</span> The rich shall not <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>give more, and the poor shall not <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>give less than half a shekel, when <span class='add'>they</span> give an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to make an atonement for your souls.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to make an atonement for your souls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX30_18">18&#160;</span> Thou shalt also make a laver <span class='add'>of</span> brass, and his foot <span class='add'>also of</span> brass, to wash <span class='add'>withal:</span> and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_19">19&#160;</span> For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat:
<span class="verse" id="EX30_20">20&#160;</span> When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="EX30_21">21&#160;</span> So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to them, <span class='add'>even</span> to him and to his seed throughout their generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX30_23">23&#160;</span> Take thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span>, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, <span class='add'>even</span> two hundred and fifty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty <span class='add'>shekels</span>,
<span class="verse" id="EX30_24">24&#160;</span> And of cassia five hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span>, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hin:
<span class="verse" id="EX30_25">25&#160;</span> And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>apothecary: it shall be an holy anointing oil.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_26">26&#160;</span> And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony,
<span class="verse" id="EX30_27">27&#160;</span> And the table and all his vessels, and the candlestick and his vessels, and the altar of incense,
<span class="verse" id="EX30_28">28&#160;</span> And the altar of burnt offering with all his vessels, and the laver and his foot.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_29">29&#160;</span> And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_30">30&#160;</span> And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that <span class='add'>they</span> may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_31">31&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_32">32&#160;</span> Upon man’s flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make <span class='add'>any other</span> like it, after the composition of it: it <span class='add'>is</span> holy, <span class='add'>and</span> it shall be holy unto you.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_33">33&#160;</span> Whosoever compoundeth <span class='add'>any</span> like it, or whosoever putteth <span class='add'>any</span> of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; <span class='add'>these</span> sweet spices with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like <span class='add'>weight:</span>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_35">35&#160;</span> And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tempered together, pure <span class='add'>and</span> holy:
<span class="verse" id="EX30_36">36&#160;</span> And thou shalt beat <span class='add'>some</span> of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_37">37&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof: it shall be unto thee holy for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX30_38">38&#160;</span> Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX31_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_2">2&#160;</span> See, I have called by name Bezaleel the <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:
<span class="verse" id="EX31_3">3&#160;</span> And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_4">4&#160;</span> To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_5">5&#160;</span> And in cutting of stones, to set <span class='add'>them</span>, and in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.
<span class="verse" id="EX31_6">6&#160;</span> And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee;
<span class="verse" id="EX31_7">7&#160;</span> The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that <span class='add'>is</span> thereupon, and all the <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>furniture of the tabernacle,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_8">8&#160;</span> And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_9">9&#160;</span> And the altar of burnt offering with all his furniture, and the laver and his foot,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_10">10&#160;</span> And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_11">11&#160;</span> And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy <span class='add'>place:</span> according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX31_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX31_13">13&#160;</span> Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it <span class='add'>is</span> a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that <span class='add'>ye</span> may know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that doth sanctify you.
<span class="verse" id="EX31_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore; for it <span class='add'>is</span> holy unto you: every one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth <span class='add'>any</span> work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
<span class="verse" id="EX31_15">15&#160;</span> Six days may work be done; but in the seventh <span class='add'>is</span> the sabbath of rest, <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>holy to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: whosoever doeth <span class='add'>any</span> work in the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="EX31_16">16&#160;</span> Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, <span class='add'>for</span> a perpetual covenant.
<span class="verse" id="EX31_17">17&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>is</span> a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever: for <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>in</span> six days the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX31_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_1">1&#160;</span> And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Up, make us gods, which shall go before us; for <span class='add'>as for</span> this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_2">2&#160;</span> And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which <span class='add'>are</span> in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring <span class='add'>them</span> unto me.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_3">3&#160;</span> And all the people brake off the golden earrings which <span class='add'>were</span> in their ears, and brought <span class='add'>them</span> unto Aaron.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he received <span class='add'>them</span> at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These <span class='add'>be</span> thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_5">5&#160;</span> And when Aaron saw <span class='add'>it</span>, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To morrow <span class='add'>is</span> a feast to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_6">6&#160;</span> And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Go, get thee down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted <span class='add'>themselves:</span>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These <span class='add'>be</span> thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I have seen this people, and, behold, it <span class='add'>is</span> a stiffnecked people:
<span class="verse" id="EX32_10">10&#160;</span> Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will make of thee a great nation.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And Moses besought <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, and said, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand?<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_13">13&#160;</span> Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit <span class='add'>it</span> for ever.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony <span class='add'>were</span> in his hand: the tables <span class='add'>were</span> written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other <span class='add'>were</span> they written.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_16">16&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tables <span class='add'>were</span> the work of God, and the writing <span class='add'>was</span> the writing of God, graven upon the tables.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_17">17&#160;</span> And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, <span class='add'>There is</span> a noise of war in the camp.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_18">18&#160;</span> And he said, <span class='add'>It is</span> not the voice of <span class='add'>them that</span> shout for mastery, neither <span class='add'>is it</span> the voice of <span class='add'>them that</span> cry for <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>being overcome: <span class='add'>but</span> the noise of <span class='add'>them that</span> sing do I hear.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt <span class='add'>it</span> in the fire, and ground <span class='add'>it</span> to powder, and strawed <span class='add'>it</span> upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink <span class='add'>of it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_21">21&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?
<span class="verse" id="EX32_22">22&#160;</span> And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they <span class='add'>are set</span> on mischief.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_23">23&#160;</span> For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go before us: for <span class='add'>as for</span> this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_24">24&#160;</span> And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break <span class='add'>it</span> off. So they gave <span class='add'>it</span> me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And when Moses saw that the people <span class='add'>were</span> naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto <span class='add'>their</span> shame among <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their enemies:)
<span class="verse" id="EX32_26">26&#160;</span> Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who <span class='add'>is</span> on the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> side? <span class='add'>let him come</span> unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_27">27&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, <span class='add'>and</span> go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_28">28&#160;</span> And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For Moses had said, <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Consecrate yourselves to day to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.<span class='nd'></span></div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_31">31&#160;</span> And Moses returned unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_32">32&#160;</span> Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin—; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_33">33&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_34">34&#160;</span> Therefore now go, lead the people unto <span class='add'>the place</span> of which I have spoken unto thee: behold, mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day when I visit I will visit their sin upon them.
<span class="verse" id="EX32_35">35&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Depart, <span class='add'>and</span> go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, <a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Unto thy seed will I give it:
<span class="verse" id="EX33_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And I will send an angel before thee; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:
<span class="verse" id="EX33_3">3&#160;</span> Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stiffnecked people: lest I consume thee in the way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_5">5&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> a stiffnecked people: I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_6">6&#160;</span> And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_7">7&#160;</span> And Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> every one which sought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which <span class='add'>was</span> without the camp.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, <span class='add'>that</span> all the people rose up, and stood every man <span class='add'>at</span> his tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_9">9&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle, and <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span></span> talked with Moses.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_10">10&#160;</span> And all the people saw the cloudy pillar stand <span class='add'>at</span> the tabernacle door: and all the people rose up and worshipped, every man <span class='add'>in</span> his tent door.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, See, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_13">13&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation <span class='add'>is</span> thy people.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_14">14&#160;</span> And he said, My presence shall go <span class='add'>with thee</span>, and I will give thee rest.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_15">15&#160;</span> And he said unto him, If thy presence go not <span class='add'>with me</span>, carry us not up hence.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_16">16&#160;</span> For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? <span class='add'>is it</span> not in that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> upon the face of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_17">17&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_18">18&#160;</span> And he said, I beseech thee, shew me thy glory.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_19">19&#160;</span> And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before thee; <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_20">20&#160;</span> And he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man see me, and live.
<span class="verse" id="EX33_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Behold, <span class='add'>there is</span> a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:
<span class="verse" id="EX33_22">22&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, while my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand while I pass by:
<span class="verse" id="EX33_23">23&#160;</span> And I will take away mine hand, and thou shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first: and I will write upon <span class='add'>these</span> tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_2">2&#160;</span> And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_3">3&#160;</span> And no man shall <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> passed by before him, and proclaimed, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
<span class="verse" id="EX34_7">7&#160;</span> Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear <span class='add'>the guilty;</span> <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to the fourth <span class='add'>generation</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_9">9&#160;</span> And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it <span class='add'>is</span> a stiffnecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And he said, Behold, <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou <span class='add'>art</span> shall see the work of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for it <span class='add'>is</span> a terrible thing that I will do with thee.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_11">11&#160;</span> Observe thou that which I command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee:
<span class="verse" id="EX34_13">13&#160;</span> But ye shall destroy their altars, break their <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>images, and cut down their groves:
<span class="verse" id="EX34_14">14&#160;</span> For thou shalt worship no other god: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, whose name <span class='add'>is</span> Jealous, <span class='add'>is</span> a <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>jealous God:
<span class="verse" id="EX34_15">15&#160;</span> Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and <span class='add'>one</span> call thee, and thou eat of his sacrifice;
<span class="verse" id="EX34_16">16&#160;</span> And thou take of <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_17">17&#160;</span> Thou shalt make thee no molten gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The feast of <a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>unleavened bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All that openeth the matrix <span class='add'>is</span> mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, <span class='add'>whether</span> ox or sheep, <span class='add'> that is male</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_20">20&#160;</span> But the firstling of an ass thou shalt redeem with a <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb: and if thou redeem <span class='add'>him</span> not, then shalt thou break his neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And none shall appear before me <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>empty.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_21">21&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>year’s end.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_23">23&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thrice in the year shall all your men children appear before the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, the God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_24">24&#160;</span> For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God thrice in the year.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of <a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the passover be left unto the morning.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_26">26&#160;</span> The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. Thou shalt not seethe a <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kid in his mother’s milk.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_27">27&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Write thou <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he was there with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandments.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses’ hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_30">30&#160;</span> And when Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_31">31&#160;</span> And Moses called unto them; and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_32">32&#160;</span> And afterward all the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken with him in mount Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_33">33&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>till</span> Moses had done speaking with them, he put <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a vail on his face.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_34">34&#160;</span> But when Moses went in before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel <span class='add'>that</span> which he was commanded.
<span class="verse" id="EX34_35">35&#160;</span> And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses’ face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses gathered all the congregation of the children of Israel together, and said unto them, These <span class='add'>are</span> the words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded, that <span class='add'>ye</span> should do them.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an holy day, a sabbath of rest to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: whosoever doeth work therein shall be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_3">3&#160;</span> Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_5">5&#160;</span> Take ye from among you an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whosoever <span class='add'>is</span> of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; gold, and silver, and brass,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_6">6&#160;</span> And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span>,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_7">7&#160;</span> And rams’ skins dyed red, and badgers’ skins, and shittim wood,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_8">8&#160;</span> And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_9">9&#160;</span> And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_10">10&#160;</span> And every wise hearted among you shall come, and make all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded;
<span class="verse" id="EX35_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>his boards, his bars, his pillars, and his sockets,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_12">12&#160;</span> The ark, and the staves thereof, <span class='add'>with</span> the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_13">13&#160;</span> The table, and his staves, and all his vessels, and the shewbread,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_14">14&#160;</span> The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the door at the entering in of the tabernacle,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The altar of burnt offering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_17">17&#160;</span> The hangings of the court, his pillars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of the court,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_18">18&#160;</span> The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_19">19&#160;</span> The cloths of service, to do service in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_21">21&#160;</span> And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, <span class='add'>and</span> they brought the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> offering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_22">22&#160;</span> And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing hearted, <span class='add'>and</span> brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered <span class='add'>offered</span> an offering of gold unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_23">23&#160;</span> And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span>, and red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_24">24&#160;</span> Every one that did offer an offering of silver and brass brought the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> offering: and every man, with whom was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_25">25&#160;</span> And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, <span class='add'>both</span> of blue, and of purple, <span class='add'>and</span> of scarlet, and of fine linen.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_26">26&#160;</span> And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_27">27&#160;</span> And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;
<span class="verse" id="EX35_28">28&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_29">29&#160;</span> The children of Israel brought a willing offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all manner of work, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded to be made by the <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto the children of Israel, See, <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;
<span class="verse" id="EX35_31">31&#160;</span> And he hath filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship;
<span class="verse" id="EX35_32">32&#160;</span> And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
<span class="verse" id="EX35_33">33&#160;</span> And in the cutting of stones, to set <span class='add'>them</span>, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_34">34&#160;</span> And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, <span class='add'>both</span> he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.
<span class="verse" id="EX35_35">35&#160;</span> Them hath he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver, and of the cunning workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, <span class='add'>even</span> of them that do any work, and of those that devise cunning work.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_1">1&#160;</span> Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_2">2&#160;</span> And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had put wisdom, <span class='add'>even</span> every one whose heart stirred him up to come unto the work to do it:
<span class="verse" id="EX36_3">3&#160;</span> And they received of Moses all the offering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it <span class='add'>withal</span>. And they brought yet unto him free offerings every morning.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_4">4&#160;</span> And all the wise men, that wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded to make.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_7">7&#160;</span> For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_8">8&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: <span class='add'>with</span> cherubims of cunning work made he them.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_9">9&#160;</span> The length of one curtain <span class='add'>was</span> twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains <span class='add'>were</span> all of one size.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_10">10&#160;</span> And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and <span class='add'>the other</span> five curtains he coupled one unto another.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_11">11&#160;</span> And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uttermost side of <span class='add'>another</span> curtain, in the coupling of the second.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Fifty loops made he in one curtain, and fifty loops made he in the edge of the curtain which <span class='add'>was</span> in the coupling of the second: the loops held one <span class='add'>curtain</span> to another.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_13">13&#160;</span> And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And he made curtains <span class='add'>of</span> goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span> for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_15">15&#160;</span> The length of one curtain <span class='add'>was</span> thirty cubits, and four cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains <span class='add'>were</span> of one size.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_16">16&#160;</span> And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_17">17&#160;</span> And he made fifty loops upon the uttermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_18">18&#160;</span> And he made fifty taches <span class='add'>of</span> brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_19">19&#160;</span> And he made a covering for the tent <span class='add'>of</span> rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering <span class='add'>of</span> badgers’ skins above <span class='add'>that</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And he made boards for the tabernacle <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, standing up.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_21">21&#160;</span> The length of a board <span class='add'>was</span> ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_22">22&#160;</span> One board had two tenons, equally distant one from another: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_23">23&#160;</span> And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward:
<span class="verse" id="EX36_24">24&#160;</span> And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_25">25&#160;</span> And for the other side of the tabernacle, <span class='add'>which is</span> toward the north corner, he made twenty boards,
<span class="verse" id="EX36_26">26&#160;</span> And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_27">27&#160;</span> And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_28">28&#160;</span> And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_29">29&#160;</span> And they were <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_30">30&#160;</span> And there were eight boards; and their sockets <span class='add'>were</span> sixteen sockets of silver, <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>under every board two sockets.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And he made <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
<span class="verse" id="EX36_32">32&#160;</span> And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_33">33&#160;</span> And he made the middle bar to shoot through the boards from the one end to the other.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_34">34&#160;</span> And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings <span class='add'>of</span> gold <span class='add'>to be</span> places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And he made a vail <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: <span class='add'>with</span> cherubims made he it of cunning work.
<span class="verse" id="EX36_36">36&#160;</span> And he made thereunto four pillars <span class='add'>of</span> shittim <span class='add'>wood</span>, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks <span class='add'>were of</span> gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_37">37&#160;</span>¶ And he made an hanging for the tabernacle door <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of needlework;
<span class="verse" id="EX36_38">38&#160;</span> And the five pillars of it with their hooks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fillets with gold: but their five sockets <span class='add'>were of</span> brass.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_1">1&#160;</span> And Bezaleel <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>made the ark <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood: two cubits and a half <span class='add'>was</span> the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it:
<span class="verse" id="EX37_2">2&#160;</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_3">3&#160;</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold, <span class='add'>to be set</span> by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_4">4&#160;</span> And he made staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_5">5&#160;</span> And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And he made the <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mercy seat <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold: two cubits and a half <span class='add'>was</span> the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_7">7&#160;</span> And he made two cherubims <span class='add'>of</span> gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat;
<span class="verse" id="EX37_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> One cherub <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>on the end on this side, and another cherub on the <span class='add'>other</span> end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_9">9&#160;</span> And the cherubims spread out <span class='add'>their</span> wings on high, <span class='add'>and</span> covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; <span class='add'>even</span> to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And he made the table <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood: two cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof:
<span class="verse" id="EX37_11">11&#160;</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_12">12&#160;</span> Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_13">13&#160;</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that <span class='add'>were</span> in the four feet thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_14">14&#160;</span> Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_15">15&#160;</span> And he made the staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_16">16&#160;</span> And he made the vessels which <span class='add'>were</span> upon the table, his <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dishes, and his spoons, and his bowls, and his covers <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to cover withal, <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And he made the <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>candlestick <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold: <span class='add'>of</span> beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same:
<span class="verse" id="EX37_18">18&#160;</span> And six branches going out of the sides thereof; three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof:
<span class="verse" id="EX37_19">19&#160;</span> Three bowls <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and three bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_20">20&#160;</span> And in the candlestick <span class='add'>were</span> four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers:
<span class="verse" id="EX37_21">21&#160;</span> And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, according to the six branches going out of it.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_22">22&#160;</span> Their knops and their branches were of the same: all of it <span class='add'>was</span> one beaten work <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_23">23&#160;</span> And he made his seven lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuffdishes, <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Of</span> a talent of pure gold made he it, and all the vessels thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_25">25&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And he made the incense altar <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood: the length of it <span class='add'>was</span> a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; <span class='add'>it was</span> foursquare; and two cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_26">26&#160;</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold, <span class='add'>both</span> the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_27">27&#160;</span> And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal.
<span class="verse" id="EX37_28">28&#160;</span> And he made the staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And he made <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the apothecary.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he made the altar of burnt offering <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood: five cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; <span class='add'>it was</span> foursquare; and three cubits the height thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_2">2&#160;</span> And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_3">3&#160;</span> And he made all the vessels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, <span class='add'>and</span> the fleshhooks, and the firepans: all the vessels thereof made he <span class='add'>of</span> brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_4">4&#160;</span> And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compass thereof beneath unto the midst of it.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_5">5&#160;</span> And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of brass, <span class='add'>to be</span> places for the staves.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_6">6&#160;</span> And he made the staves <span class='add'>of</span> shittim wood, and overlaid them with brass.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_7">7&#160;</span> And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hollow with boards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_8">8&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>And he made the laver <span class='add'>of</span> brass, and the foot of it <span class='add'>of</span> brass, of the lookingglasses of <span class='add'>the women</span> <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>assembling, which assembled <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court <span class='add'>were of</span> fine twined linen, an hundred cubits:
<span class="verse" id="EX38_10">10&#160;</span> Their pillars <span class='add'>were</span> twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets <span class='add'>were of</span> silver.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_11">11&#160;</span> And for the north side <span class='add'>the hangings were</span> an hundred cubits, their pillars <span class='add'>were</span> twenty, and their sockets of brass twenty; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets <span class='add'>of</span> silver.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_12">12&#160;</span> And for the west side <span class='add'>were</span> hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets <span class='add'>of</span> silver.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_13">13&#160;</span> And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_14">14&#160;</span> The hangings of the one side <span class='add'>of the gate were</span> fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_15">15&#160;</span> And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, <span class='add'>were</span> hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_16">16&#160;</span> All the hangings of the court round about <span class='add'>were</span> of fine twined linen.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_17">17&#160;</span> And the sockets for the pillars <span class='add'>were of</span> brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets <span class='add'>of</span> silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters <span class='add'>of</span> silver; and all the pillars of the court <span class='add'>were</span> filleted with silver.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_18">18&#160;</span> And the hanging for the gate of the court <span class='add'>was</span> needlework, <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the length, and the height in the breadth <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_19">19&#160;</span> And their pillars <span class='add'>were</span> four, and their sockets <span class='add'>of</span> brass four; their hooks <span class='add'>of</span> silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fillets <span class='add'>of</span> silver.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_20">20&#160;</span> And all the <a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, <span class='add'>were of</span> brass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_21">21&#160;</span>¶ This is the sum of the tabernacle, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to the commandment of Moses, <span class='add'>for</span> the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_22">22&#160;</span> And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_23">23&#160;</span>And with him <span class='add'>was</span> Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a cunning workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_24">24&#160;</span> All the gold that was occupied for the work in all the work of the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, even the gold of the offering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_25">25&#160;</span> And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and threescore and fifteen shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
<span class="verse" id="EX38_26">26&#160;</span> A bekah for <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>every man, <span class='add'>that is</span>, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_27">27&#160;</span> And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_28">28&#160;</span> And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five <span class='add'>shekels</span>  he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their chapiters, and filleted them.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_29">29&#160;</span> And the brass of the offering <span class='add'>was</span> seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.
<span class="verse" id="EX38_30">30&#160;</span> And therewith he made the sockets to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,
<span class="verse" id="EX38_31">31&#160;</span> And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_1">1&#160;</span> And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, and <a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>made the holy garments for Aaron; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_2">2&#160;</span> And he made the ephod <span class='add'>of</span> gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_3">3&#160;</span> And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut <span class='add'>it into</span> wires, to work <span class='add'>it</span> in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, <span class='add'>with</span> cunning work.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_4">4&#160;</span> They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple <span class='add'>it</span> together: by the two edges was it coupled together.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_5">5&#160;</span> And the curious girdle of his ephod, that <span class='add'>was</span> upon it, <span class='add'>was</span> of the same, according to the work thereof; <span class='add'>of</span> gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_6">6&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_7">7&#160;</span> And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, <span class='add'>that they should be</span> stones for a <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>memorial to the children of Israel; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And he made the breastplate <span class='add'>of</span> cunning work, like the work of the ephod; <span class='add'>of</span> gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_9">9&#160;</span> It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span <span class='add'>was</span> the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, <span class='add'>being</span> doubled.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_10">10&#160;</span> And they set in it four rows of stones: <span class='add'>the first</span> row <span class='add'>was</span> a <a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this <span class='add'>was</span> the first row.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_11">11&#160;</span> And the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_12">12&#160;</span> And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_13">13&#160;</span> And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: <span class='add'>they were</span> inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_14">14&#160;</span> And the stones <span class='add'>were</span> according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, <span class='add'>like</span> the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the twelve tribes.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_15">15&#160;</span> And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, <span class='add'>of</span> wreathen work <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_16">16&#160;</span> And they made two ouches <span class='add'>of</span> gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_17">17&#160;</span> And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_18">18&#160;</span> And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_19">19&#160;</span> And they made two rings of gold, and put <span class='add'>them</span> on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it, which <span class='add'>was</span> on the side of the ephod inward.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_20">20&#160;</span> And they made two <span class='add'>other</span> golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the <span class='add'>other</span> coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_21">21&#160;</span> And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And he made the robe of the ephod <span class='add'>of</span> woven work, all <span class='add'>of</span> blue.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_23">23&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, <span class='add'>with</span> a band round about the hole, that it should not rend.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_24">24&#160;</span> And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and scarlet, <span class='add'>and</span> twined <span class='add'>linen</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_25">25&#160;</span> And they made <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bells <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about between the pomegranates;
<span class="verse" id="EX39_26">26&#160;</span> A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister <span class='add'>in;</span> as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And they made coats <span class='add'>of</span> fine linen <span class='add'>of</span> woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_28">28&#160;</span> And a mitre <span class='add'>of</span> fine linen, and goodly bonnets <span class='add'>of</span> fine linen, and <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>linen breeches <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_29">29&#160;</span> And a girdle <span class='add'>of</span> fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, <span class='add'>of</span> needlework; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And they made the plate of the holy crown <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, <span class='add'>like to</span> the engravings of a signet, <a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>HOLINESS TO THE <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_31">31&#160;</span> And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten <span class='add'>it</span> on high upon the mitre; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Thus was all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of Israel did according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so did they. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his pillars, and his sockets,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_34">34&#160;</span> And the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers’ skins, and the vail of the covering,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_35">35&#160;</span> The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_36">36&#160;</span> The table, <span class='add'>and</span> all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_37">37&#160;</span> The pure candlestick, <span class='add'>with</span> the lamps thereof, <span class='add'>even with</span> the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels thereof, and the oil for light,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_38">38&#160;</span> And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and <a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the sweet incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle door,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_39">39&#160;</span> The brasen altar, and his grate of brass, his staves, and all his vessels, the laver and his foot,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_40">40&#160;</span> The hangings of the court, his pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="EX39_41">41&#160;</span> The cloths of service to do service in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons’ garments, to minister in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_42">42&#160;</span> According to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.
<span class="verse" id="EX39_43">43&#160;</span> And Moses did look upon all the work, and, behold, they had done it as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EX40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="EX40_2">2&#160;</span> On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_4">4&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order <a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_5">5&#160;</span> And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the door to the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_7">7&#160;</span> And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that <span class='add'>is</span> therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels thereof: and it shall be holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>most holy.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot, and sanctify it.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_13">13&#160;</span> And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:
<span class="verse" id="EX40_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest’s office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_16">16&#160;</span> Thus did Moses: according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him, so did he. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> the <a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tabernacle was reared up.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_18">18&#160;</span> And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his pillars.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_19">19&#160;</span> And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark:
<span class="verse" id="EX40_21">21&#160;</span> And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and <a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_23">23&#160;</span> And he set the bread in order upon it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_25">25&#160;</span> And he lighted the lamps before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail:
<span class="verse" id="EX40_27">27&#160;</span> And he burnt sweet incense thereon; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And he set up the hanging <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_29">29&#160;</span> And he put the altar of burnt offering <span class='add'>by</span> the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; as the <a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash <span class='add'>withal</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_31">31&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet thereat:
<span class="verse" id="EX40_32">32&#160;</span> When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_33">33&#160;</span> And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_34">34&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> filled the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_35">35&#160;</span> And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> filled the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_36">36&#160;</span> And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>went onward in all their journeys:
<span class="verse" id="EX40_37">37&#160;</span> But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.
<span class="verse" id="EX40_38">38&#160;</span> For the cloud of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_8'>46. 8</a>. ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_14'>6. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thigh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_27'>46. 27</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_22'>10. 22</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_17'>7. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. And as they afflicted them, so they multiplied, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_20'>6. 20</a> Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_59'>26. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_20'>7. 20</a> Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_23'>11. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Drawn out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man, a prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_3'>18. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_14'>15. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_4'>46. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. knew.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_30'>7. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS5_15'>5. 15</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_33'>7. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_32'>22 32</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_32'>7. 32</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, but by strong hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_2'>11. 2</a> &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_35'>12. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Egypt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall be and shall be.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. since yesterday, nor since the third day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_19'>10 19</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_11'>13. 11</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shouldest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, knife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made it touch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX5_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_18'>3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Let the work be heavy upon the men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX5_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a matter of a day in his day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX5_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to stink.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX5_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. delivering thou hast not delivered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lift up my hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. skortness, or straitness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_9'>46 9</a>. 1 Chr <a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_3'>5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R14_24'>4. 24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_17'>3 17</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Num <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_57'>26 57</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_2'>6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_1'>2 1</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_59'>26 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX6_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_11'>25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX7_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gathering of their waters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX7_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_5'>17. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX7_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_44'>78. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX7_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dough.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Have this honour over me, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against when.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Against to morrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a mixture of noisome beasts, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a redemptior.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, by to morrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_9'>16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, destroyed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX8_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_18'>3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_21'>4. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_17'>9. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made thee stand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. set not his heart unto.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. voices of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_1'>24. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hidden, or, dark.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX9_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of Moses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_21'>4. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_9'>16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eye.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who and who, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hastened to call.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fastened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that one may feel darkness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_1'>18. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. into our hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX11_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_22'>3. 22</a> &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_35'>12. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX11_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_29'>12. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX11_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that is at thy feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX11_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heat of anger.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. son of a year.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. between the two evenings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, princes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for a destruction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_5'>23. 5</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_16'>28. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_28'>11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_6'>4 6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_4'>11. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_11'>18. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. house of the pit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dough.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.35</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_22'>3. 22</a> &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_2'>11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_3'>33. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a great mixture.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_13'>15. 13</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_6'>7. 6</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_17'>3. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a night of observations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU9_12'>9. 12</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_36'>19. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX12_47"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. do it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_29'>22. 29</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX84_19'>84. 19</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_26'>27. 26</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_13'>3. 13</a> &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU8_16'>8 16</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_29'>22. 29</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_19'>34. 19</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_30'>44. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cause to pass over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to morrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, by five in a rank.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN50_25'>50. 25</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_32'>24. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_6'>33. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_14'>14 14</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_33'>1. 33</a> Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_14'>78. 14</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_1'>10 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX13_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_19'>9. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_7'>33 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_6'>24 6</a>. 1 Mac. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_23'>4. 23</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_9'>6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for whereas you have seen the Egyptians to day, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_23'>4. 23</a>. l's. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS114_3'>114. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_13'>78. 13</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_1'>10. 1</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_29'>11 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and made them to qo heavily.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shook off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_11'>106. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_20'>10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, repossess.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mighty ones?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_25'>2. 25</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS2_9'>2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_25'>2. 25</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS2_9'>2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Bitterness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_5'>38. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits for them]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_9'>33. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the portion of a day in his day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_31'>11. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_7'>11. 7</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_24'>78. 24</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_20'>16. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, What is this? or, It is a portion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_31'>6. 31</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_3'>10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the poll, or, head.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. souls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C28_15'>8. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS5_12'>5. 12</a>. Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_15'>9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_4'>20. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_20'>7. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_9'>20 9</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_15'>78. 15</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_41'>105. 41</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_4'>11. 4</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_4'>10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Tentation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Chiding, or, Strife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_17'>25. 17</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_3'>11. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_45'>7. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU24_20'>24. 20</a>. 1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_3'>15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.15</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class="add">The <span class="nd">Lord</span> my banner.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Because the hand of Amalek is <span class="add">against the throne of the <span class="nd">Lord,</span></span> therefore, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">the hand upon the throne of the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_16'>2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_22'>2. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A stranger there.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, My God is an help.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 1. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_10'>10</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_16'>16</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_22'>22</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_7'>5. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_18'>14. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man and his fellow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Fading thou wilt fade.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_9'>1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_38'>7. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_2'>29. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_2'>5 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_14'>10. 14</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_1'>24. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_9'>2. 9</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 24 <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_3'>3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_7'>7</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_27'>5. 27</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_17'>26. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_20'>12. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cornet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_11'>4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX19_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. contest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_6'>5. 6</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS81_10'>81. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_1'>26. 1</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS97_7'>97. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_12'>19. 12</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_11'>5. 11</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_33'>5. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_12'>23. 12</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_12'>20. 12</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_16'>5. 16</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_4'>15. 4</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_2'>6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_21'>5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_7'>7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_18'>12. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_27'>5 27</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_16'>18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_5'>27. 5</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS8_31'>8. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. build them with hewing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_41'>25 41</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_12'>15. 12</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR34_14'>34. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with his body.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. saying shall say.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be evil in the eyes of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_17'>24. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_3'>19. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_9'>20 9</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_20'>20. 20</a> Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_4'>15. 4</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, revileth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, his neighbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his ceasing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb avenged.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_20'>24. 20</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_21'>19. 21</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_38'>5. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_5'>9. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_32"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 21.32</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits of silver]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_6'>12. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_39'>31. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_23'>22. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weigh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 13 <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_13'>13</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_14'>14</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_15'>15</a> 1 Mac. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_24'>2. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_33'>19 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_37'>25. 37</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_19'>23. 19</a>. Pa. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_5'>15. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_5'>23. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, judges.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thy fulness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. tear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 13. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_2'>2</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_12'>12</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_19'>34. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX22_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV22_8'>22. 8</a> Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_31'>44. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, receive.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. answer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_4'>22. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wilt thou cease to help him? or, and wouldest cease to leave thy business for him: thou shalt surely leave it to join with him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_19'>16. 19</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_29'>20. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the seeing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_3'>25. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, olive trees.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_8'>20. 8</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_13'>5. 13</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 names]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_3'>13. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_18'>34. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_16'>16. 16</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_4'>35. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, feast</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_26'>34. 26</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_21'>14. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_2'>33. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I will afflict them that afflict thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_2'>33. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_11'>24. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_25'>7. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_14'>7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. neck.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_12'>24. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.32</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_15'>34. 15</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_2'>7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX23_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_16'>7. 16</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS23_13'>23. 13</a>. Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX24_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_8'>19. 8</a>. &amp;c 24. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_3'>3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_7'>7</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_27'>5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX24_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_3'>3.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX24_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.8</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_2'>1. 2</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_20'>9. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX24_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_28'>34. 28</a>. Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_9'>9 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb take for me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, heave offering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX35_5'>35. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, silk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_4'>28. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_15'>28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX37_1'>37. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of the matter of the mercy seat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU7_89'>7. 89</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX37_10'>37. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to pour out withal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.31</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX37_17'>37. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_37"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cause to ascend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the face of it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_44'>7. 44</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB8_5'>8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which thou wast caused to see.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the work of a cunning workman, or, embroiderer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 26.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits curtains]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, covering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the remainder, or, surplusage.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. twinned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.30</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 25. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_9'>9</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_40'>40</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_44'>7. 44</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB8_5'>8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX27_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he shewed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX27_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fifty by fifty</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX27_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb to ascend up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, embroidered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_24'>13. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fill in it fillings of stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ruby.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fillings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, skirts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_9'>45. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_41"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fill their hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. flesh of then nakedness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV8_2'>8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_25'>30. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bind.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fill the hand of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_41'>28. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV1_4'>1. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">It seemeth by anatomy, and the Hebrew doctors, to be the midriff</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shake to and fro.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_26"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 consecrations]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he of his sons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV8_31'>8. 31</a>. Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_4'>12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_3'>28. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_43"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Israel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_12'>26. 12</a>. 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_16'>6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the roof and the walls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. walls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ribs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. incense of spices.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, setteth up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. causeth to ascend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. between the two events.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. 1. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_2'>2</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. them that are to be numbered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_25'>27. 25</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_47'>3. 47</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK45_12'>45. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiply.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. diminish.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_40'>29. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, perfumer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb salted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX31_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.2</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R12_20'>2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX31_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vessels.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX31_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_8'>20. 8</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_12'>5. 12</a> Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_12'>20. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX31_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. holiness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX31_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_31'>1. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX31_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_10'>9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_40'>7. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_19'>106. 19</a> 1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_28'>12. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.6</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_7'>10. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_12'>9. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_8'>9. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_3'>33 3</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_23'>106. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">the face of the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_13'>14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_7'>15 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN48_16'>48. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_18'>31. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weakness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_21'>9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. those that rose up against them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">And Moses said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the <span class="nd">Lord,</span> because, every man</span> hath been against his son, and against his brother, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Fill your hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX33_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX33_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_22'>7. 22</a>. Josh <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_11'>24. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX33_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_9'>32. 9</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX33_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_16'>9. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_12'>19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_5'>20. 5</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_9'>5. 9</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_18'>32. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_2'>5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_32'>23. 32</a> Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_2'>7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb statues.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_5'>20. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_2'>11. 2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_15'>23. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_4'>13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_29'>22. 29</a> Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_30'>44. 30</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_15'>23. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_12'>23. 12</a>. Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_12'>5. 12</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_14'>13 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_16'>23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb revolution of the year.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 23. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_14'>14</a>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_17'>17</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_18'>23. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 34.25</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_19'>23. 19</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_21'>14. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_13'>4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_18'>24. 18</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_9'>9. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX34_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.33</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C23_13'>3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_9'>20. 9</a> Lev <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_3'>23 3</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_12'>5 12</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. holiness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_2'>25 2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_31'>26. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 35.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits his boards,]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_1'>30. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX27_1'>27. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_23'>30. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_29"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 35.29</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 hands]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX35_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.30</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_2'>31. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_1'>26. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_10'>26. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. twinned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. two sockets, two sockets under one board.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.31</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_28'>25. 28</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_5'>30. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the work of a needleworker, or, embroiderer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_10'>25. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_17'>25. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, out of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, out of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_29'>25. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to pour out withal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>25. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 37.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 made he after]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_1'>30. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_35'>30. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX27_1'>27. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, brasen glasses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. assembling by troops.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX27_19'>27. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a poll.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_10'>31. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX35_19'>35. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_9'>28. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_12'>28. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 39.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ruby.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_33'>28. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_42'>28. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_36'>28. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the incense of sweet spices.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_35'>26. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the order thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. holiness of holinesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU7_1'>7 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX35_12'>35. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_9'>30. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU9_15'>9 15</a>. 1 Kings &amp;c <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_0'>10.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX40_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. journeyed.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
