<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Ezra 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Ezra</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='ER0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Ezra  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="ER1_1">1&#160;</span> Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and <span class='add'>put it</span> also in writing, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ER1_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Judah.
<span class="verse" id="ER1_3">3&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is there</span> among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Judah, and build the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, (he <span class='add'>is</span> the God,) which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ER1_4">4&#160;</span> And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of God that <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER1_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all <span class='add'>them</span> whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ER1_6">6&#160;</span>And all they that <span class='add'>were</span> about them <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, beside all <span class='add'>that</span> was willingly offered.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his gods;
<span class="verse" id="ER1_8">8&#160;</span> Even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="ER1_9">9&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives,
<span class="verse" id="ER1_10">10&#160;</span> Thirty basons of gold, silver basons of a second <span class='add'>sort</span> four hundred and ten, <span class='add'>and</span> other vessels a thousand.
<span class="verse" id="ER1_11">11&#160;</span> All the vessels of gold and of silver <span class='add'>were</span> five thousand and four hundred. All <span class='add'>these</span> did Sheshbazzar bring up with <span class='add'>them of</span> <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the captivity that were brought up from Babylon unto Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_1">1&#160;</span>Now <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these <span class='add'>are</span> the children of the province that went up out of the captivity, of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city;
<span class="verse" id="ER2_2">2&#160;</span> Which came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="ER2_3">3&#160;</span> The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_4">4&#160;</span> The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_5">5&#160;</span> The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_6">6&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua <span class='add'>and</span> Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_7">7&#160;</span> The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_8">8&#160;</span> The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty and five.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_9">9&#160;</span> The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_10">10&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Bani, six hundred forty and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_11">11&#160;</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_12">12&#160;</span> The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_13">13&#160;</span> The children of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_14">14&#160;</span> The children of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_15">15&#160;</span> The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and four.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_16">16&#160;</span> The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_17">17&#160;</span> The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_18">18&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jorah, an hundred and twelve.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_19">19&#160;</span> The children of Hashum, two hundred twenty and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_20">20&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Gibbar, ninety and five.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_21">21&#160;</span> The children of Beth-lehem, an hundred twenty and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_22">22&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>men of Netophah, fifty and six.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_23">23&#160;</span> The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_24">24&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Azmaveth, forty and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_25">25&#160;</span> The children of Kirjath-arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_26">26&#160;</span> The children of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_27">27&#160;</span> The men of Michmas, an hundred twenty and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_28">28&#160;</span> The men of Beth-el and Ai, two hundred twenty and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_29">29&#160;</span> The children of Nebo, fifty and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_30">30&#160;</span> The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_31">31&#160;</span> The children of the other <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_32">32&#160;</span> The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_33">33&#160;</span> The children of Lod, <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and five.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_34">34&#160;</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_35">35&#160;</span> The children of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_36">36&#160;</span>¶ The priests: the children of <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_37">37&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Immer, a thousand fifty and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_38">38&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_39">39&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Harim, a thousand and seventeen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_40">40&#160;</span>¶ The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children of <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hodaviah, seventy and four.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_41">41&#160;</span>¶ The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_42">42&#160;</span>¶ The children of the porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, <span class='add'>in</span> all an hundred thirty and nine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_43">43&#160;</span>¶ The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_44">44&#160;</span> The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_45">45&#160;</span> The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_46">46&#160;</span> The children of Hagab, the children of <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Shalmai, the children of Hanan,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_47">47&#160;</span> The children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaiah,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_48">48&#160;</span> The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of Gazzam,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_49">49&#160;</span> The children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_50">50&#160;</span> The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_51">51&#160;</span> The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_52">52&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_53">53&#160;</span> The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Thamah,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_54">54&#160;</span> The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_55">55&#160;</span>¶ The children of Solomon’s servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Peruda,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_56">56&#160;</span> The children of Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_57">57&#160;</span> The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ami.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_58">58&#160;</span> All the <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Nethinims, and the children of <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon’s servants, <span class='add'>were</span> three hundred ninety and two.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_59">59&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>were</span> they which went up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub, Addan, <span class='add'>and</span> Immer: but they could not shew their father’s house, and their <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seed, whether they <span class='add'>were</span> of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="ER2_60">60&#160;</span> The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_61">61&#160;</span>¶ And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Barzillai; which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name:
<span class="verse" id="ER2_62">62&#160;</span> These sought their register <span class='add'>among</span> those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_63">63&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest with <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Urim and with Thummim.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_64">64&#160;</span>¶ The whole congregation together <span class='add'>was</span> forty and two thousand three hundred <span class='add'>and</span> threescore,
<span class="verse" id="ER2_65">65&#160;</span> Beside their servants and their maids, of whom <span class='add'>there were</span> seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and <span class='add'> there were</span> among them two hundred singing men and singing women.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_66">66&#160;</span> Their horses <span class='add'>were</span> seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five;
<span class="verse" id="ER2_67">67&#160;</span> Their camels, four hundred thirty and five; <span class='add'>their</span> asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER2_68">68&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>some</span> of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem, offered freely for the house of God to set it up in his place:
<span class="verse" id="ER2_69">69&#160;</span> They gave after their ability unto the <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>treasure of the work threescore and one thousand drams of gold, and five thousand pound of silver, and one hundred priests’ garments.
<span class="verse" id="ER2_70">70&#160;</span> So the priests, and the Levites, and <span class='add'>some</span> of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER3_1">1&#160;</span> And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel <span class='add'>were</span> in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_2">2&#160;</span> Then stood up <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, and <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zerubbabel the son of <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings thereon, as <span class='add'>it is</span> <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>written in the law of Moses the man of God.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_3">3&#160;</span> And they set the altar upon his bases; for fear <span class='add'>was</span> upon them because of the people of those countries: and they offered burnt offerings thereon unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> burnt offerings morning and evening.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_4">4&#160;</span> They kept also the feast of tabernacles, <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as <span class='add'>it is</span> written, and <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>offered</span> the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom, <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as the duty of every day required;
<span class="verse" id="ER3_5">5&#160;</span> And afterward <span class='add'>offered</span> the continual burnt offering, both of the new moons, and of all the set feasts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that were consecrated, and of every one that willingly <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>offered a freewill offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_6">6&#160;</span> From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. But <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the foundation of the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was not <span class='add'>yet</span> laid.<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="ER3_7">7&#160;</span> They gave money also unto the masons, and to the <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>carpenters; and meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all they that were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_9">9&#160;</span> Then stood Jeshua <span class='add'>with</span> his sons and his brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Judah, <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>together, to set forward the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad, <span class='add'>with</span> their sons and their brethren the Levites.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_10">10&#160;</span> And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, after the <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ordinance of David king of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_11">11&#160;</span> And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; because <span class='add'>he is</span> good, for his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because the foundation of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was laid.
<span class="verse" id="ER3_12">12&#160;</span> But many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers, <span class='add'>who were</span> ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and many shouted aloud for joy:
<span class="verse" id="ER3_13">13&#160;</span> So that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people: for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was heard afar off.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER4_1">1&#160;</span> Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the children of the captivity builded the temple unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="ER4_2">2&#160;</span> Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with you: for we seek your God, as ye <span class='add'>do;</span> and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esar-haddon king of Assur, which brought us up hither.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_3">3&#160;</span> But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do with us to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together will build unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath commanded us.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_4">4&#160;</span> Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building,
<span class="verse" id="ER4_5">5&#160;</span> And hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER4_6">6&#160;</span> And in the reign of <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, wrote they <span class='add'>unto him</span> an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER4_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the letter <span class='add'>was</span> written in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted in the Syrian tongue.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_8">8&#160;</span> Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort:
<span class="verse" id="ER4_9">9&#160;</span> Then <span class='add'>wrote</span> Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, <span class='add'>and</span> the Elamites,
<span class="verse" id="ER4_10">10&#160;</span> And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnappar brought over, and set in the cities of Samaria, and the rest <span class='add'>that are</span> on this side the river, and <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at such a time.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER4_11">11&#160;</span>¶ This <span class='add'>is</span> the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side the river, and at such a time.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_12">12&#160;</span> Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thee to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad city, and have <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>set up the walls <span class='add'>thereof</span>, and <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>joined the foundations.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_13">13&#160;</span> Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the walls set up <span class='add'>again, then</span> will they not <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pay toll, tribute, and custom, and <span class='add'>so</span> thou shalt endamage the <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>revenue of the kings.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_14">14&#160;</span> Now because <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>we have maintenance from <span class='add'>the king’s</span> palace, and it was not meet for us to see the king’s dishonour, therefore have we sent and certified the king;
<span class="verse" id="ER4_15">15&#160;</span> That search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city <span class='add'>is</span> a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that they have <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>moved sedition <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>within the same of old time: for which cause was this city destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_16">16&#160;</span> We certify the king that, if this city be builded <span class='add'>again</span>, and the walls thereof set up, by this means thou shalt have no portion on this side the river. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER4_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Then</span> sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and <span class='add'>to</span> Shimshai the scribe, and <span class='add'>to</span> the rest of their <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>companions that dwell in Samaria, and <span class='add'>unto</span> the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at such a time.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_18">18&#160;</span> The letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before me.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_19">19&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found that this city of old time hath <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made insurrection against kings, and <span class='add'>that</span> rebellion and sedition have been made therein.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_20">20&#160;</span> There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all <span class='add'>countries</span> beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and custom, was paid unto them.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that this city be not builded, until <span class='add'>another</span> commandment shall be given from me.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_22">22&#160;</span> Take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER4_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes’ letter <span class='add'>was</span> read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by force and power.
<span class="verse" id="ER4_24">24&#160;</span> Then ceased the work of the house <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of God which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER5_1">1&#160;</span> Then the prophets, <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Haggai the prophet, and <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, <span class='add'>even</span> unto them.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_2">2&#160;</span> Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem: and with them <span class='add'>were</span> the prophets of God helping them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER5_3">3&#160;</span>¶ At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shethar-boznai, and their companions, and said thus unto them, Who hath commanded you to build this house, and to make up this wall?
<span class="verse" id="ER5_4">4&#160;</span> Then said we unto them after this manner, What are the names of the men <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that make this building?
<span class="verse" id="ER5_5">5&#160;</span> But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, that they could not cause them to cease, till the matter came to Darius: and then they returned answer by letter concerning this <span class='add'>matter</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER5_6">6&#160;</span>¶ The copy of the letter that Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shethar-boznai, and his companions the Apharsachites, which <span class='add'>were</span> on this side the river, sent unto Darius the king:
<span class="verse" id="ER5_7">7&#160;</span> They sent a letter unto him, <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wherein was written thus; Unto Darius the king, all peace.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_8">8&#160;</span> Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of Judea, to the house of the great God, which is builded with <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>great stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth fast on, and prospereth in their hands.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_9">9&#160;</span> Then asked we those elders, <span class='add'>and</span> said unto them thus, Who commanded you to build this house, and to make up these walls?
<span class="verse" id="ER5_10">10&#160;</span> We asked their names also, to certify thee, that we might write the names of the men that <span class='add'>were</span> the chief of them.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_11">11&#160;</span> And thus they returned us answer, saying, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded these many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and set up.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_12">12&#160;</span> But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto wrath, he gave them into the hand of <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the people away into Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_13">13&#160;</span> But in the first year of <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Cyrus the king of Babylon <span class='add'>the same</span> king Cyrus made a decree to build this house of God.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_14">14&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the vessels also of gold and silver of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that <span class='add'>was</span> in Jerusalem, and brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto <span class='add'>one</span>, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Sheshbazzar, whom he had made <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>governor;
<span class="verse" id="ER5_15">15&#160;</span> And said unto him, Take these vessels, go, carry them into the temple that <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his place.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_16">16&#160;</span> Then came the same Sheshbazzar, <span class='add'>and</span> laid the foundation of the house of God which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem: and since that time even until now hath it been in building, and <span class='add'>yet</span> it is not finished.
<span class="verse" id="ER5_17">17&#160;</span> Now therefore, if <span class='add'>it seem</span> good to the king, let there be search made in the king’s treasure house, which <span class='add'>is</span> there at Babylon, whether it be <span class='add'>so</span>, that a decree was made of Cyrus the king to build this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER6_1">1&#160;</span> Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rolls, where the treasures were <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>laid up in Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_2">2&#160;</span> And there was found at <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Achmetha, in the palace that <span class='add'>is</span> in the province of the Medes, a roll, and therein <span class='add'>was</span> a record thus written:
<span class="verse" id="ER6_3">3&#160;</span> In the first year of Cyrus the king <span class='add'>the same</span> Cyrus the king made a decree <span class='add'>concerning</span> the house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be builded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore cubits, <span class='add'>and</span> the breadth thereof threescore cubits;
<span class="verse" id="ER6_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>With</span> three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the expenses be given out of the king’s house:
<span class="verse" id="ER6_5">5&#160;</span> And also let the golden and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be restored, and <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>brought again unto the temple which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem, <span class='add'>every one</span> to his place, and place <span class='add'>them</span> in the house of God.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_6">6&#160;</span> Now <span class='add'>therefore</span>, Tatnai, governor beyond the river, Shethar-boznai, and <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>your companions the Apharsachites, which <span class='add'>are</span> beyond the river, be ye far from thence:
<span class="verse" id="ER6_7">7&#160;</span> Let the work of this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in his place.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_8">8&#160;</span> Moreover <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I make a decree what ye shall do to the elders of these Jews for the building of this house of God: that of the king’s goods, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hindered.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_9">9&#160;</span> And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for the burnt offerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the appointment of the priests which <span class='add'>are</span> at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail:
<span class="verse" id="ER6_10">10&#160;</span> That they may offer sacrifices <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of sweet savours unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_11">11&#160;</span> Also I have made a decree, that whosoever shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>let him be hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghill for this.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_12">12&#160;</span> And the God that hath caused his name to dwell there destroy all kings and people, that shall put to their hand to alter <span class='add'>and</span> to destroy this house of God which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree; let it be done with speed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER6_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then Tatnai, governor on this side the river, Shethar-boznai, and their companions, according to that which Darius the king had sent, so they did speedily.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_14">14&#160;</span> And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they builded, and finished <span class='add'>it</span>, according to the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_15">15&#160;</span> And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the rest of <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God with joy,
<span class="verse" id="ER6_17">17&#160;</span> And offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin offering for all Israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_18">18&#160;</span> And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses, for the service of God, which <span class='add'>is</span> at Jerusalem; <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as it is written in the book of Moses.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_19">19&#160;</span> And the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the fourteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_20">20&#160;</span> For the priests and the Levites were purified together, all of them <span class='add'>were</span> pure, and killed the passover for all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves.
<span class="verse" id="ER6_21">21&#160;</span> And the children of Israel, which were come again out of captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthiness of the heathen of the land, to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, did eat,
<span class="verse" id="ER6_22">22&#160;</span> And kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the king of Assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER7_1">1&#160;</span> Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,
<span class="verse" id="ER7_2">2&#160;</span> The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,
<span class="verse" id="ER7_3">3&#160;</span> The son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,
<span class="verse" id="ER7_4">4&#160;</span> The son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,
<span class="verse" id="ER7_5">5&#160;</span> The son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest:
<span class="verse" id="ER7_6">6&#160;</span> This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he <span class='add'>was</span> a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel had given: and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God upon him.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_7">7&#160;</span> And there went up <span class='add'>some</span> of the children of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_8">8&#160;</span> And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which <span class='add'>was</span> in the seventh year of the king.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_9">9&#160;</span> For upon the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>began he to go up from Babylon, and on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_10">10&#160;</span> For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to do <span class='add'>it</span>, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER7_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now this <span class='add'>is</span> the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, <span class='add'>even</span> a scribe of the words of the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and of his statutes to Israel.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_12">12&#160;</span> Artaxerxes, king of kings, <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect <span class='add'>peace</span>, and at such a time.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_13">13&#160;</span> I make a decree, that all they of the people of Israel, and <span class='add'>of</span> his priests and Levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own freewill to go up to Jerusalem, go with thee.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_14">14&#160;</span> Forasmuch as thou art sent <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of the king, and of his <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>seven counsellors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God which <span class='add'>is</span> in thine hand;
<span class="verse" id="ER7_15">15&#160;</span> And to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem,
<span class="verse" id="ER7_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem:
<span class="verse" id="ER7_17">17&#160;</span> That thou mayest buy speedily with this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat offerings and their drink offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_18">18&#160;</span> And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of your God.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_19">19&#160;</span> The vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house of thy God, <span class='add'>those</span> deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_20">20&#160;</span> And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow <span class='add'>it</span> out of the king’s treasure house.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_21">21&#160;</span> And I, <span class='add'>even</span> I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the treasurers which <span class='add'>are</span> beyond the river, that whatsoever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of you, it be done speedily,
<span class="verse" id="ER7_22">22&#160;</span> Unto an hundred talents of silver, and to an hundred <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing <span class='add'>how much</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven: for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?
<span class="verse" id="ER7_24">24&#160;</span> Also we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_25">25&#160;</span> And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy God; and teach ye them that know <span class='add'>them</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="ER7_26">26&#160;</span> And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether <span class='add'>it be</span> unto death, or <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER7_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of our fathers, which hath put <span class='add'>such a thing</span> as this in the king’s heart, to beautify the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem:
<span class="verse" id="ER7_28">28&#160;</span> And hath extended mercy unto me before the king, and his counsellors, and before all the king’s mighty princes. And I was strengthened as the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God <span class='add'>was</span> upon me, and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> now the chief of their fathers, and <span class='add'>this is</span> the genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_2">2&#160;</span> Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of the sons of David; Hattush.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_3">3&#160;</span> Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_4">4&#160;</span> Of the sons of Pahath-moab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_5">5&#160;</span> Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_6">6&#160;</span> Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_7">7&#160;</span> And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with him seventy males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_8">8&#160;</span> And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the son of Michael, and with him fourscore males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_9">9&#160;</span> Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_10">10&#160;</span> And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him an hundred and threescore males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_11">11&#160;</span> And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with him twenty and eight males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_12">12&#160;</span> And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the son of Hakkatan, and with him an hundred and ten males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_13">13&#160;</span> And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose names <span class='add'>are</span> these, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them threescore males.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_14">14&#160;</span> Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Zabbud, and with them seventy males.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava; and there <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abode we in tents three days: and I viewed the people, and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_16">16&#160;</span> Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men; also for <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of understanding.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_17">17&#160;</span> And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, and <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I told them what they should say unto Iddo, <span class='add'>and</span> to his brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring unto us ministers for the house of our God.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_18">18&#160;</span> And by the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen;
<span class="verse" id="ER8_19">19&#160;</span> And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brethren and their sons, twenty;
<span class="verse" id="ER8_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes had appointed for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of Ahava, that we might afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_22">22&#160;</span> For I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had spoken unto the king, saying, The hand of our God <span class='add'>is</span> upon all them for good that seek him; but his power and his wrath <span class='add'>is</span> against all them that forsake him.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_23">23&#160;</span> So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated of us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them,
<span class="verse" id="ER8_25">25&#160;</span> And weighed unto them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, <span class='add'>even</span> the offering of the house of our God, which the king, and his counsellors, and his lords, and all Israel <span class='add'>there</span> present, had offered:
<span class="verse" id="ER8_26">26&#160;</span> I even weighed unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels an hundred talents, <span class='add'>and</span> of gold an hundred talents;
<span class="verse" id="ER8_27">27&#160;</span> Also twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fine copper, <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>precious as gold.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_28">28&#160;</span> And I said unto them, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; the vessels <span class='add'>are</span> holy also; and the silver and the gold <span class='add'>are</span> a freewill offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_29">29&#160;</span> Watch ye, and keep <span class='add'>them</span>, until ye weigh <span class='add'>them</span> before the chief of the priests and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_30">30&#160;</span> So took the priests and the Levites the weight of the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, to bring <span class='add'>them</span> to Jerusalem unto the house of our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as lay in wait by the way.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_32">32&#160;</span> And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; and with him <span class='add'>was</span> Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and with them <span class='add'>was</span> Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui, Levites;
<span class="verse" id="ER8_34">34&#160;</span> By number <span class='add'>and</span> by weight of every one: and all the weight was written at that time.
<span class="verse" id="ER8_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Also</span> the children of those that had been carried away, which were come out of the captivity, offered burnt offerings unto the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy and seven lambs, twelve he goats <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering: all <span class='add'>this was</span> a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER8_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And they delivered the king’s commissions unto the king’s lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they furthered the people, and the house of God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER9_1">1&#160;</span> Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands, <span class='add'>doing</span> according to their abominations, <span class='add'>even</span> of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_2">2&#160;</span> For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for their sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the people of <span class='add'>those</span> lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath been chief in this trespass.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_3">3&#160;</span> And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down astonied.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_4">4&#160;</span> Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those that had been carried away; and I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER9_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>heaviness; and having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God,
<span class="verse" id="ER9_6">6&#160;</span> And said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased over <span class='add'>our</span> head, and our <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trespass is grown up unto the heavens.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_7">7&#160;</span> Since the days of our fathers <span class='add'>have</span> we <span class='add'>been</span> in a great trespass unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, <span class='add'>and</span> our priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_8">8&#160;</span> And now for a <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>little space grace hath been <span class='add'>shewed</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_9">9&#160;</span>For we <span class='add'>were</span> bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_10">10&#160;</span> And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments,
<span class="verse" id="ER9_11">11&#160;</span> Which thou hast commanded <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by thy servants the prophets, saying, <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The land, unto which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands, with their abominations, which have filled it <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from one end to another with their uncleanness.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_12">12&#160;</span> Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither take their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and leave <span class='add'>it</span> for an inheritance to your children for ever.
<span class="verse" id="ER9_13">13&#160;</span> And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hast punished us less than our iniquities <span class='add'>deserve</span>, and hast given us <span class='add'>such</span> deliverance as this;
<span class="verse" id="ER9_14">14&#160;</span> Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be angry with us till thou hadst consumed <span class='add'>us</span>, so that <span class='add'>there should be</span> no remnant nor escaping?
<span class="verse" id="ER9_15">15&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, thou <span class='add'>art</span> righteous: for we remain yet escaped, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day: behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee because of this.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ER10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER10_1">1&#160;</span> Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children: for the people <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wept very sore.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_2">2&#160;</span> And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, <span class='add'>one</span> of the sons of Elam, answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_3">3&#160;</span> Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and let it be done according to the law.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_4">4&#160;</span> Arise; for <span class='add'>this</span> matter <span class='add'>belongeth</span> unto thee: we also <span class='add'>will be</span> with thee: be of good courage, and do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_5">5&#160;</span> Then arose Ezra, and made the chief priests, the Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they should do according to this word. And they sware. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER10_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and <span class='add'>when</span> he came thither, he did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the transgression of them that had been carried away.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_7">7&#160;</span> And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto all the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem;
<span class="verse" id="ER10_8">8&#160;</span> And that whosoever would not come within three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders, all his substance should be <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>forfeited, and himself separated from the congregation of those that had been carried away.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER10_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together unto Jerusalem within three days. It <span class='add'>was</span> the ninth month, on the twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month; and all the people sat in the street of the house of God, trembling because of <span class='add'>this</span> matter, and for <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the great rain.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_10">10&#160;</span> And Ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have transgressed, and <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have taken strange wives, to increase the trespass of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_11">11&#160;</span> Now therefore make confession unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers, and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_12">12&#160;</span> Then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice, As thou hast said, so must we do.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_13">13&#160;</span> But the people <span class='add'>are</span> many, and <span class='add'>it is</span> a time of much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither <span class='add'>is this</span> a work of one day or two: for <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>we are many that have transgressed in this thing.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_14">14&#160;</span> Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at appointed times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for this matter be turned from us.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER10_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were employed about this <span class='add'>matter:</span> and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_16">16&#160;</span> And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, <span class='add'>with</span> certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers, and all of them by <span class='add'>their</span> names, were separated, and sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_17">17&#160;</span> And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange wives by the first day of the first month. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ER10_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And among the sons of the priests there were found that had taken strange wives: <span class='add'>namely</span>, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren; Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_19">19&#160;</span> And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives; and <span class='add'>being</span> guilty, <span class='add'>they offered</span> a ram of the flock for their trespass.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_20">20&#160;</span> And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_21">21&#160;</span> And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_22">22&#160;</span> And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_23">23&#160;</span> Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same <span class='add'>is</span> Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_24">24&#160;</span> Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_25">25&#160;</span> Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_26">26&#160;</span> And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_27">27&#160;</span> And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_28">28&#160;</span> Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, <span class='add'>and</span> Athlai.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_29">29&#160;</span> And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_30">30&#160;</span> And of the sons of Pahath-moab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_31">31&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>of</span> the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_32">32&#160;</span> Benjamin, Malluch, <span class='add'>and</span> Shemariah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_33">33&#160;</span> Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, <span class='add'>and</span> Shimei.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_34">34&#160;</span> Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_35">35&#160;</span> Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_36">36&#160;</span> Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_37">37&#160;</span> Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_38">38&#160;</span> And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_39">39&#160;</span> And Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_40">40&#160;</span><a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_41">41&#160;</span> Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,
<span class="verse" id="ER10_42">42&#160;</span> Shallum, Amariah, <span class='add'>and</span> Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_43">43&#160;</span> Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah.
<span class="verse" id="ER10_44">44&#160;</span> All these had taken strange wives: and <span class='add'>some</span> of them had wives by whom they had children. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_22'>36. 22</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_12'>25. 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR29_10'>29. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. caused a voice to pass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_28'>44. 28</a>. &amp;c 45. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_1'>1</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lift him up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, helped them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_13'>24. 13</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_7'>36. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER5_14'>5. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the transportation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_6'>7. 6</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_7'>7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_11'>7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_15'>7. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_24'>7. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_25'>7. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_22"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 children]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_28'>7. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_7'>7.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Harid, as it is in some copies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.36</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_7'>24 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.37</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_14'>24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.38</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R19_12'>9. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.39</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_8'>24. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_40"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.40</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER3_9'>3. 9</a>. called also Hodevah, Neh <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_43'>7. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_46"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Shamlai.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_52"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_54'>7. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_55"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.55</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_57'>7. 57</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_57"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_59'>7. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_58"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.58</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. 9. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS9_21'>21</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS9_27'>27</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R19_2'>9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_58"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.58</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_21'>9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_59"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pedigree.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_61"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.61</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S217_27'>17. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_62"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.62</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they were polluted from the priesthood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_63"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, governor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_63"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_30'>28. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER2_69"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.69</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R126_20'>26. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Joshua, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS_1'>Hag. 1</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_0'>1.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_12'>1 12</a>. &amp;c Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_27'>3 27</a>, called Zorobabel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_12'>1. 12</a>. &amp;c Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_27'>3. 27</a>, called Salathiel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_5'>12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU29_12'>29. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_16'>23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the matter of the day in his day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 offered, offered]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">the temple of the <span class="nd">Lord</span> was not</span> yet founded.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, workmen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC9_36'>9. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_40'>2. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as one.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER3_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_31'>6 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='1CH.xhtml#R116_7'>16. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='1CH.xhtml#R125_1'>25 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the sons of the transportation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ahashverosh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. societies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, secretary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. societies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. Chceneth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, finished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. sewed together.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. we are salted with the salt of the palace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. made.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. in the midst thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald societies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. by me a decree is set</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. lifted up itself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. Make a decree.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. by arm and power.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER4_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 of the God]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Hag. <a href='HAG.xhtml#HG1_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC1_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. that build this building?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. in the midst whereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. stones of rolling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K16_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_2'>24. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_8'>25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_8'>1. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER6_5'>6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER5_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, deputy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. books.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald made to descend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ecbatana, or, in a coffer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. go.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. their societies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. by me a decree is made.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. made to cease.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. of rest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. let him be destroyed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. decree.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. the sons of the transportation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. according to the writing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER6_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_6'>3. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU8_9'>8. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was the foundation of the going up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to Ezra the priest, a perfect scribe of the law of the God of heaven, peace, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. from before the king.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Esth. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET1_14'>1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER8_25'>8. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. Aramalc</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Whatsoever is of the decree.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER7_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Chald. to rooting out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the youngest son.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Zaccur, as some read.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pitched.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Jarib]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I put words in their mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_43'>2. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_21"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits of]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. yellow, or, shining brass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER8_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, afflication.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, guiltiness</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb moment.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a pin: that is, a constant and sure abode.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to set up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of thy servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_32'>23. 32</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_3'>7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from mouth to mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER9_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hast withheld beneath our iniquities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wept a great weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to bring forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. devoted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the showers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. have caused to dwell, or, have brought back.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, we have greatly offended in this thing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, till this matter be dispatched.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ER10_40"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Mabnadebai, according to some copies.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
