<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Genesis 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Genesis</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='GN0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The First Book of Moses, called Genesis  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="GN1_1">1&#160;</span> In the <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_2">2&#160;</span> And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness <span class='add'>was</span> upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_3">3&#160;</span> And God said, <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let there be light: and there was light.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_4">4&#160;</span> And God saw the light, that <span class='add'>it was</span> good: and God divided <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the light from the darkness.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_5">5&#160;</span> And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>And the evening and the morning were the first day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And God said, <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let there be a <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_7">7&#160;</span> And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which <span class='add'>were</span> under the firmament from the waters which <span class='add'>were</span> above the firmament: and it was so.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_8">8&#160;</span> And God called the <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And God said, <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry <span class='add'>land</span> appear: and it was so.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_10">10&#160;</span> And God called the dry <span class='add'>land</span> Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that <span class='add'>it was</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_11">11&#160;</span> And God said, Let the earth bring forth <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grass, the herb yielding seed, <span class='add'>and</span> the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed <span class='add'>is</span> in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_12">12&#160;</span> And the earth brought forth grass, <span class='add'>and</span> herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed <span class='add'>was</span> in itself, after his kind: and God saw that <span class='add'>it was</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_13">13&#160;</span> And the evening and the morning were the third day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And God said, Let there be <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:
<span class="verse" id="GN1_15">15&#160;</span> And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_16">16&#160;</span> And God made two great lights; the greater light <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: <span class='add'>he made</span> the stars also.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_17">17&#160;</span> And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth,
<span class="verse" id="GN1_18">18&#160;</span> And to <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that <span class='add'>it was</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_19">19&#160;</span> And the evening and the morning were the fourth day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_20">20&#160;</span> And God said, <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let the waters bring forth abundantly the <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>moving creature that hath <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>life, and fowl <span class='add'>that</span> may fly above the earth in the <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>open firmament of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_21">21&#160;</span> And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that <span class='add'>it was</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_22">22&#160;</span> And God blessed them, saying, <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_23">23&#160;</span> And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_25">25&#160;</span> And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that <span class='add'>it was</span> good. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And God said, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_27">27&#160;</span> So God created man in his <span class='add'>own</span> image, in the image of God created he him; <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>male and female created he them.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_28">28&#160;</span> And God blessed them, and God said unto them, <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>moveth upon the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN1_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bearing seed, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the which <span class='add'>is</span> the fruit of a tree yielding seed; <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to you it shall be for meat.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_30">30&#160;</span> And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein <span class='add'>there is</span> <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>life, <span class='add'>I have given</span> every green herb for meat: and it was so.
<span class="verse" id="GN1_31">31&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, <span class='add'>it was</span> very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN2_1">1&#160;</span> Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_3">3&#160;</span> And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from all his work which God <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>created and made.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN2_4">4&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God made the earth and the heavens,
<span class="verse" id="GN2_5">5&#160;</span> And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and <span class='add'>there was</span> not a man to till the ground.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_6">6&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God formed man <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>of</span> the <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>man became a living soul.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN2_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_9">9&#160;</span> And out of the ground made the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_10">10&#160;</span> And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_11">11&#160;</span> The name of the first <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pison: that <span class='add'>is</span> it which compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where <span class='add'>there is</span> gold;
<span class="verse" id="GN2_12">12&#160;</span> And the gold of that land <span class='add'>is</span> good: there <span class='add'>is</span> bdellium and the onyx stone.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_13">13&#160;</span> And the name of the second river <span class='add'>is</span> Gihon: the same <span class='add'>is</span> it that compasseth the whole land of <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Ethiopia.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_14">14&#160;</span> And the name of the third river <span class='add'>is</span> Hiddekel: that <span class='add'>is</span> it which goeth <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river <span class='add'>is</span> Euphrates.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God took <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN2_16">16&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou mayest freely eat:
<span class="verse" id="GN2_17">17&#160;</span> But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou shalt surely die.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN2_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God said, <span class='add'>It is</span> not good that the man should be alone; I will make <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>him an help <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>meet for him.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_19">19&#160;</span> And out of the ground the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought <span class='add'>them</span> unto <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that <span class='add'>was</span> the name thereof.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_20">20&#160;</span> And Adam <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN2_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof;
<span class="verse" id="GN2_22">22&#160;</span> And the rib, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God had taken from man, <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_23">23&#160;</span> And Adam said, This <span class='add'>is</span> now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>taken out of Man.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh.
<span class="verse" id="GN2_25">25&#160;</span> And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_1">1&#160;</span> Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God had made. And he said unto the woman, <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
<span class="verse" id="GN3_2">2&#160;</span> And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden:
<span class="verse" id="GN3_3">3&#160;</span> But of the fruit of the tree which <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely die:
<span class="verse" id="GN3_5">5&#160;</span> For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_6">6&#160;</span> And when the woman saw that the tree <span class='add'>was</span> good for food, and that it <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make <span class='add'>one</span> wise, she took of the fruit thereof, <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_7">7&#160;</span> And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they <span class='add'>were</span> naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>aprons.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_8">8&#160;</span> And they heard the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God walking in the garden in the <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God amongst the trees of the garden.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where <span class='add'>art</span> thou?
<span class="verse" id="GN3_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I <span class='add'>was</span> naked; and I hid myself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_11">11&#160;</span> And he said, Who told thee that thou <span class='add'>wast</span> naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat?
<span class="verse" id="GN3_12">12&#160;</span> And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest <span class='add'>to be</span> with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God said unto the woman, What <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou <span class='add'>art</span> cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life:
<span class="verse" id="GN3_15">15&#160;</span> And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_16">16&#160;</span> Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to thy husband, and he shall <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rule over thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_17">17&#160;</span> And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed <span class='add'>is</span> the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat <span class='add'>of</span> it all the days of thy life;
<span class="verse" id="GN3_18">18&#160;</span> Thorns also and thistles shall it <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field;
<span class="verse" id="GN3_19">19&#160;</span> In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou <span class='add'>art</span>, and unto dust shalt thou return.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_20">20&#160;</span> And Adam called his wife’s name <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Eve; because she was the mother of all living.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_21">21&#160;</span> Unto Adam also and to his wife did the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God make coats of skins, and clothed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN3_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever:
<span class="verse" id="GN3_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken.
<span class="verse" id="GN3_24">24&#160;</span> So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_1">1&#160;</span> And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_2">2&#160;</span> And she again bare his brother <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Abel. And Abel was <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_3">3&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_4">4&#160;</span> And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>flock and of the fat thereof. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>respect unto Abel and to his offering:
<span class="verse" id="GN4_5">5&#160;</span> But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?
<span class="verse" id="GN4_7">7&#160;</span> If thou doest well, shalt thou not <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door. And <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unto thee <span class='add'>shall be</span> his desire, and thou shalt rule over him.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_8">8&#160;</span> And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>slew him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Cain, Where <span class='add'>is</span> Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: <span class='add'>Am</span> I my brother’s keeper?
<span class="verse" id="GN4_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother’s <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood crieth unto me from the ground.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_11">11&#160;</span>And now <span class='add'>art</span> thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother’s blood from thy hand;
<span class="verse" id="GN4_12">12&#160;</span> When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_13">13&#160;</span> And Cain said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>My punishment <span class='add'>is</span> greater than I can bear.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> every one that findeth me shall slay me.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Cain went out from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_17">17&#160;</span> And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Enoch: and he builded a city, and called the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_18">18&#160;</span> And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Lamech.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_20">20&#160;</span> And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dwell in tents, and <span class='add'>of such as have</span> cattle.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_21">21&#160;</span> And his brother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Jubal: he was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_22">22&#160;</span> And Zillah, she also bare Tubal-cain, an <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and the sister of Tubal-cain <span class='add'>was</span> Naamah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_23">23&#160;</span> And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to my hurt.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_24">24&#160;</span> If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN4_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Seth: For God, <span class='add'>said she</span>, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.
<span class="verse" id="GN4_26">26&#160;</span> And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Enos: then began men <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to call upon the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_1">1&#160;</span> This <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him;
<span class="verse" id="GN5_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam, in the day when they were created. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat <span class='add'>a son</span> in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_5">5&#160;</span> And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_6">6&#160;</span> And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Enos:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_7">7&#160;</span> And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_8">8&#160;</span> And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Enos lived ninety years, and begat <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Cainan:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_10">10&#160;</span> And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_11">11&#160;</span> And all the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Mahalaleel:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_13">13&#160;</span> And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_14">14&#160;</span> And all the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Jared:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_16">16&#160;</span> And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_17">17&#160;</span> And all the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_19">19&#160;</span> And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_20">20&#160;</span> And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Methuselah:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_22">22&#160;</span> And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_23">23&#160;</span> And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_24">24&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Enoch walked with God: and he <span class='add'>was</span> not; for God took him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_25">25&#160;</span> And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Lamech:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_26">26&#160;</span> And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_27">27&#160;</span> And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN5_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_29">29&#160;</span> And he called his name <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Noah, saying, This <span class='add'>same</span> shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath cursed.
<span class="verse" id="GN5_30">30&#160;</span> And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters:
<span class="verse" id="GN5_31">31&#160;</span> And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died.
<span class="verse" id="GN5_32">32&#160;</span> And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them,
<span class="verse" id="GN6_2">2&#160;</span> That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they <span class='add'>were</span> fair; and they took them wives of all which they chose.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for that he also <span class='add'>is</span> flesh: yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_4">4&#160;</span> There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare <span class='add'>children</span> to them, the same <span class='add'>became</span> mighty men which <span class='add'>were</span> of old, men of renown. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='nd'>GOD</span> saw that the wickedness of man <span class='add'>was</span> great in the earth, and <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>every imagination of the thoughts of his <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heart <span class='add'>was</span> only evil <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continually.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_6">6&#160;</span> And it repented the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_8">8&#160;</span> But Noah found grace in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Noah: <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Noah was a just man <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>perfect in his generations, <span class='add'>and</span> Noah walked with God.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_10">10&#160;</span> And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_11">11&#160;</span> The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_12">12&#160;</span> And God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_13">13&#160;</span> And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN6_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Make thee an ark of gopher wood; <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_15">15&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is the fashion</span> which thou shalt make it <span class='add'>of:</span> The length of the ark <span class='add'>shall be</span> three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_16">16&#160;</span> A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; <span class='add'>with</span> lower, second, and third <span class='add'>stories</span> shalt thou make it.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_17">17&#160;</span> And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein <span class='add'>is</span> the breath of life, from under heaven; <span class='add'>and</span> every thing that <span class='add'>is</span> in the earth shall die.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_18">18&#160;</span> But with thee will I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons’ wives with thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_19">19&#160;</span> And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every <span class='add'>sort</span> shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep <span class='add'>them</span> alive with thee; they shall be male and female.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_20">20&#160;</span> Of fowls after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every <span class='add'>sort</span> shall come unto thee, to keep <span class='add'>them</span> alive.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_21">21&#160;</span> And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and thou shalt gather <span class='add'>it</span> to thee; and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.
<span class="verse" id="GN6_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded him, so did he.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_1">1&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_2">2&#160;</span> Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that <span class='add'>are</span> not clean by two, the male and his female.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_3">3&#160;</span> Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_4">4&#160;</span> For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy from off the face of the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_5">5&#160;</span> And Noah did according unto all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_6">6&#160;</span> And Noah <span class='add'>was</span> six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_8">8&#160;</span> Of clean beasts, and of beasts that <span class='add'>are</span> not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that creepeth upon the earth,
<span class="verse" id="GN7_9">9&#160;</span> There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>after seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_11">11&#160;</span>¶ In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep broken up, and the <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>windows of heaven were opened.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_12">12&#160;</span> And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_13">13&#160;</span> In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah’s wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, into the ark;
<span class="verse" id="GN7_14">14&#160;</span> They, and every beast after his kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sort.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_15">15&#160;</span> And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein <span class='add'>is</span> the breath of life.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_16">16&#160;</span> And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God had commanded him: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shut him in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_17">17&#160;</span> And the flood was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_18">18&#160;</span> And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_19">19&#160;</span> And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that <span class='add'>were</span> under the whole heaven, were covered.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_20">20&#160;</span> Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN7_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and every man:
<span class="verse" id="GN7_22">22&#160;</span> All in whose nostrils <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the breath of life, of all that <span class='add'>was</span> in the dry <span class='add'>land</span>, died.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_23">23&#160;</span> And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Noah only remained <span class='add'>alive</span>, and they that <span class='add'>were</span> with him in the ark.
<span class="verse" id="GN7_24">24&#160;</span> And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN8_1">1&#160;</span> And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that <span class='add'>was</span> with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;
<span class="verse" id="GN8_2">2&#160;</span> The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;
<span class="verse" id="GN8_3">3&#160;</span> And the waters returned from off the earth <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN8_4">4&#160;</span> And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_5">5&#160;</span> And the waters <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth <span class='add'>month</span>, on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN8_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made:
<span class="verse" id="GN8_7">7&#160;</span> And he sent forth a raven, which went forth <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_8">8&#160;</span> Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground;
<span class="verse" id="GN8_9">9&#160;</span> But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters <span class='add'>were</span> on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her, and <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pulled her in unto him into the ark.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_10">10&#160;</span> And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark;
<span class="verse" id="GN8_11">11&#160;</span> And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth <span class='add'>was</span> an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_12">12&#160;</span> And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN8_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the six hundredth and <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>first year, in the first <span class='add'>month</span>, the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_14">14&#160;</span> And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN8_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And God spake unto Noah, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN8_16">16&#160;</span> Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives with thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_17">17&#160;</span> Bring forth with thee every living thing that <span class='add'>is</span> with thee, of all flesh, <span class='add'>both</span> of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_18">18&#160;</span> And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons’ wives with him:
<span class="verse" id="GN8_19">19&#160;</span> Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, <span class='add'>and</span> whatsoever creepeth upon the earth, after their <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>kinds, went forth out of the ark.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN8_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Noah builded an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smelled <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a sweet savour; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man’s sake; for the <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>imagination of man’s heart <span class='add'>is</span> evil from his youth; neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.
<span class="verse" id="GN8_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN9_1">1&#160;</span> And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_2">2&#160;</span> And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth <span class='add'>upon</span> the earth, and upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_3">3&#160;</span> Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>green herb have I given you all things.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But flesh with the life thereof, <span class='add'>which is</span> the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_5">5&#160;</span> And surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man’s brother will I require the life of man.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed: <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for in the image of God made he man.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_7">7&#160;</span> And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN9_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN9_9">9&#160;</span> And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you;
<span class="verse" id="GN9_10">10&#160;</span> And with every living creature that <span class='add'>is</span> with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_11">11&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN9_12">12&#160;</span> And God said, This <span class='add'>is</span> the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that <span class='add'>is</span> with you, for perpetual generations:
<span class="verse" id="GN9_13">13&#160;</span> I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud:
<span class="verse" id="GN9_15">15&#160;</span> And I will remember my covenant, which <span class='add'>is</span> between me and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_16">16&#160;</span> And the bow shall be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_17">17&#160;</span> And God said unto Noah, This <span class='add'>is</span> the token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all flesh that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN9_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham <span class='add'>is</span> the father of <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_19">19&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_20">20&#160;</span> And Noah began <span class='add'>to be</span> an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard:
<span class="verse" id="GN9_21">21&#160;</span> And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_22">22&#160;</span> And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_23">23&#160;</span> And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father; and their faces <span class='add'>were</span> backward, and they saw not their father’s nakedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN9_24">24&#160;</span> And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_25">25&#160;</span> And he said, Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_26">26&#160;</span> And he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Shem; and Canaan shall be <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his servant.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_27">27&#160;</span> God shall <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN9_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
<span class="verse" id="GN9_29">29&#160;</span> And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN10_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_3">3&#160;</span> And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_4">4&#160;</span> And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_5">5&#160;</span> By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN10_6">6&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabtecha: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_8">8&#160;</span> And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_9">9&#160;</span> He was a mighty hunter before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_10">10&#160;</span> And the beginning of his kingdom was <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_11">11&#160;</span> Out of that land <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh, and <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the city Rehoboth, and Calah,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_12">12&#160;</span> And Resen between Nineveh and Calah: the same <span class='add'>is</span> a great city.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_13">13&#160;</span> And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_14">14&#160;</span> And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN10_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Canaan begat <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_16">16&#160;</span> And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_17">17&#160;</span> And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_18">18&#160;</span> And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_19">19&#160;</span> And the border of the Canaanites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_20">20&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, <span class='add'>and</span> in their nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN10_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were <span class='add'>children</span> born.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_22">22&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_23">23&#160;</span> And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_24">24&#160;</span> And Arphaxad begat <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Salah; and Salah begat Eber.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one <span class='add'>was</span> Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Joktan.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_26">26&#160;</span> And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_27">27&#160;</span> And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_28">28&#160;</span> And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
<span class="verse" id="GN10_29">29&#160;</span> And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Joktan.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_30">30&#160;</span> And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_31">31&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.
<span class="verse" id="GN10_32">32&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN11_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the whole earth was of one <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>language, and of one <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>speech.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_3">3&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_4">4&#160;</span> And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top <span class='add'>may reach</span> unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN11_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Behold, the people <span class='add'>is</span> one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_7">7&#160;</span> Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another’s speech.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_8">8&#160;</span> So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore is the name of it called <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Babel; because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN11_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>These <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Shem: Shem <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_11">11&#160;</span> And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_12">12&#160;</span> And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_13">13&#160;</span> And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_14">14&#160;</span> And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_15">15&#160;</span> And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Peleg:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_17">17&#160;</span> And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_18">18&#160;</span> And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_19">19&#160;</span> And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_20">20&#160;</span> And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Serug:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_21">21&#160;</span> And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_22">22&#160;</span> And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_23">23&#160;</span> And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_24">24&#160;</span> And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Terah:
<span class="verse" id="GN11_25">25&#160;</span> And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_26">26&#160;</span> And Terah lived seventy years, and <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN11_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_28">28&#160;</span> And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_29">29&#160;</span> And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram’s wife <span class='add'>was</span> Sarai; and the name of Nahor’s wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_30">30&#160;</span> But Sarai was barren; she <span class='add'>had</span> no child.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_31">31&#160;</span> And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son’s son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram’s wife; and they went forth with them from <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there.
<span class="verse" id="GN11_32">32&#160;</span> And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN12_1">1&#160;</span> Now the <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father’s house, unto a land that I will shew thee:
<span class="verse" id="GN12_2">2&#160;</span> And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing:
<span class="verse" id="GN12_3">3&#160;</span> And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee: <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN12_4">4&#160;</span> So Abram departed, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram <span class='add'>was</span> seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_5">5&#160;</span> And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN12_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite <span class='add'>was</span> then in the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto Abram, and said, <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there builded he an <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who appeared unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_8">8&#160;</span> And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Beth-el, and pitched his tent, <span class='add'>having</span> Beth-el on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and called upon the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_9">9&#160;</span> And Abram journeyed, <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>going on still toward the south.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN12_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine <span class='add'>was</span> grievous in the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou <span class='add'>art</span> a fair woman to look upon:
<span class="verse" id="GN12_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This <span class='add'>is</span> his wife: and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_13">13&#160;</span> Say, I pray thee, thou <span class='add'>art</span> my sister: that it may be well with me for thy sake; and my soul shall live because of thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN12_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she <span class='add'>was</span> very fair.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_15">15&#160;</span> The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh’s house.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_16">16&#160;</span> And he entreated Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_17">17&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_18">18&#160;</span> And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she <span class='add'>was</span> thy wife?
<span class="verse" id="GN12_19">19&#160;</span> Why saidst thou, She <span class='add'>is</span> my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take <span class='add'>her</span>, and go thy way.
<span class="verse" id="GN12_20">20&#160;</span> And Pharaoh commanded <span class='add'>his</span> men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he had.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN13_1">1&#160;</span> And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_2">2&#160;</span> And Abram <span class='add'>was</span> very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_3">3&#160;</span> And he went on his journeys from the south even to Beth-el, unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Beth-el and Hai;
<span class="verse" id="GN13_4">4&#160;</span> Unto the <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there Abram called on the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN13_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_6">6&#160;</span> And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_7">7&#160;</span> And there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram’s cattle and the herdmen of Lot’s cattle: and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_8">8&#160;</span> And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we <span class='add'>be</span> <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>brethren.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me: if <span class='add'>thou wilt take</span> the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if <span class='add'>thou depart</span> to the right hand, then I will go to the left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN13_10">10&#160;</span> And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it <span class='add'>was</span> well watered every where, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, <span class='add'>even</span> as the garden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_11">11&#160;</span> Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_12">12&#160;</span> Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched <span class='add'>his</span> tent toward Sodom.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_13">13&#160;</span> But the men of Sodom <span class='add'>were</span> wicked and sinners before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> exceedingly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN13_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward:
<span class="verse" id="GN13_15">15&#160;</span> For all the land which thou seest, <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_16">16&#160;</span> And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, <span class='add'>then</span> shall thy seed also be numbered.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_17">17&#160;</span> Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN13_18">18&#160;</span> Then Abram removed <span class='add'>his</span> tent, and came and dwelt in the <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>plain of Mamre, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN14_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations;
<span class="verse" id="GN14_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That these</span> made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_3">3&#160;</span> All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_4">4&#160;</span> Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_5">5&#160;</span> And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Shaveh Kiriathaim,
<span class="verse" id="GN14_6">6&#160;</span> And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>El-paran, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_7">7&#160;</span> And they returned, and came to En-mishpat, which <span class='add'>is</span> Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezon-tamar.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_8">8&#160;</span> And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same <span class='add'>is</span> Zoar;) and they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim;
<span class="verse" id="GN14_9">9&#160;</span> With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with five.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_10">10&#160;</span> And the vale of Siddim <span class='add'>was full of</span> slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that remained fled to the mountain.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_11">11&#160;</span> And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_12">12&#160;</span> And they took Lot, Abram’s brother’s son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN14_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these <span class='add'>were</span> confederate with Abram.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_14">14&#160;</span> And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>armed his <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trained <span class='add'>servants</span>, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued <span class='add'>them</span> unto Dan.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_15">15&#160;</span> And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which <span class='add'>is</span> on the left hand of Damascus.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_16">16&#160;</span> And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN14_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, at the valley of Shaveh, which <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>king’s dale.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_18">18&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he <span class='add'>was</span> the priest of the most high God.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_19">19&#160;</span> And he blessed him, and said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:
<span class="verse" id="GN14_20">20&#160;</span> And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tithes of all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN14_21">21&#160;</span> And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>persons, and take the goods to thyself.
<span class="verse" id="GN14_22">22&#160;</span> And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth,
<span class="verse" id="GN14_23">23&#160;</span> That I will not <span class='add'>take</span> from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that <span class='add'>is</span> thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich:
<span class="verse" id="GN14_24">24&#160;</span> Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN15_1">1&#160;</span> After these things the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I <span class='add'>am</span> thy shield, <span class='add'>and</span> thy exceeding <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>great reward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN15_2">2&#160;</span> And Abram said, Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, what wilt thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house <span class='add'>is</span> this Eliezer of Damascus?
<span class="verse" id="GN15_3">3&#160;</span> And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_4">4&#160;</span> And, behold, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>came</span> unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_5">5&#160;</span> And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>So shall thy seed be.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_6">6&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>believed in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and he counted it to him for righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN15_7">7&#160;</span> And he said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_8">8&#160;</span> And he said, Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?
<span class="verse" id="GN15_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_10">10&#160;</span> And he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_11">11&#160;</span> And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN15_12">12&#160;</span> And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_13">13&#160;</span> And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land <span class='add'>that is</span> not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years;
<span class="verse" id="GN15_14">14&#160;</span> And also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a good old age.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_16">16&#160;</span> But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites <span class='add'>is</span> not yet full. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN15_17">17&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a burning lamp that passed between those pieces.
<span class="verse" id="GN15_18">18&#160;</span> In the same day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made a covenant with Abram, saying, <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates:
<span class="verse" id="GN15_19">19&#160;</span> The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites,
<span class="verse" id="GN15_20">20&#160;</span> And the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims,
<span class="verse" id="GN15_21">21&#160;</span> And the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN16_1">1&#160;</span> Now Sarai Abram’s wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Hagar.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_2">2&#160;</span> And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_3">3&#160;</span> And Sarai Abram’s wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN16_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_5">5&#160;</span> And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong <span class='add'>be</span> upon thee: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> judge between me and thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_6">6&#160;</span> But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid <span class='add'>is</span> in thy hand; do to her <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN16_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_8">8&#160;</span> And he said, Hagar, Sarai’s maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_9">9&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN16_10">10&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_11">11&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto her, Behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt call his name <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ishmael; because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath heard thy affliction.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_12">12&#160;</span> And he will be a wild man; his hand <span class='add'>will be</span> against every man, and every man’s hand against him; <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_13">13&#160;</span> And she called the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?
<span class="verse" id="GN16_14">14&#160;</span> Wherefore the well was called <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beer-lahai-roi; behold, <span class='add'>it is</span> between Kadesh and Bered.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN16_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son’s name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael.
<span class="verse" id="GN16_16">16&#160;</span> And Abram <span class='add'>was</span> fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN17_1">1&#160;</span> And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> the Almighty God; <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>walk before me, and be thou <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>perfect.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_2">2&#160;</span> And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_3">3&#160;</span> And Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN17_4">4&#160;</span> As for me, behold, my covenant <span class='add'>is</span> with thee, and thou shalt be a father of <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>many nations.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_5">5&#160;</span> Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham; <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for a father of many nations have I made thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_6">6&#160;</span> And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN17_7">7&#160;</span> And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_8">8&#160;</span> And I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN17_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_10">10&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Every man child among you shall be circumcised.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_11">11&#160;</span> And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a token of the covenant betwixt me and you.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_12">12&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he that is eight days old <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which <span class='add'>is</span> not of thy seed.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_13">13&#160;</span> He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_14">14&#160;</span> And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he hath broken my covenant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN17_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah <span class='add'>shall</span> her name <span class='add'>be</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_16">16&#160;</span> And I will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her, and <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>she shall be <span class='add'>a mother</span> of nations; kings of people shall be of her.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_17">17&#160;</span> Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall <span class='add'>a child</span> be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?
<span class="verse" id="GN17_18">18&#160;</span> And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!
<span class="verse" id="GN17_19">19&#160;</span> And God said, <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, <span class='add'>and</span> with his seed after him.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_20">20&#160;</span> And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>twelve princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_21">21&#160;</span> But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee at this set time in the next year.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_22">22&#160;</span> And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN17_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham’s house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_24">24&#160;</span> And Abraham <span class='add'>was</span> ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_25">25&#160;</span> And Ishmael his son <span class='add'>was</span> thirteen years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_26">26&#160;</span> In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
<span class="verse" id="GN17_27">27&#160;</span> And all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN18_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day;
<span class="verse" id="GN18_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he lift up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw <span class='add'>them</span>, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself toward the ground,
<span class="verse" id="GN18_3">3&#160;</span> And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant:
<span class="verse" id="GN18_4">4&#160;</span> Let a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree:
<span class="verse" id="GN18_5">5&#160;</span> And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_6">6&#160;</span> And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead <span class='add'>it</span>, and make cakes upon the hearth.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_7">7&#160;</span> And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and good, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> unto a young man; and he hasted to dress it.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_8">8&#160;</span> And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set <span class='add'>it</span> before them; and he stood by them under the tree, and they did eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN18_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And they said unto him, Where <span class='add'>is</span> Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard <span class='add'>it</span> in the tent door, which <span class='add'>was</span> behind him.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_11">11&#160;</span> Now Abraham and Sarah <span class='add'>were</span> old <span class='add'>and</span> well stricken in age; <span class='add'>and</span> it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shall I have pleasure, my <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lord being old also?
<span class="verse" id="GN18_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child, which am old?
<span class="verse" id="GN18_14">14&#160;</span> Is any thing too hard for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_15">15&#160;</span> Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN18_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_17">17&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do;
<span class="verse" id="GN18_18">18&#160;</span> Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blessed in him?
<span class="verse" id="GN18_19">19&#160;</span> For I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to do justice and judgment; that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous;
<span class="verse" id="GN18_21">21&#160;</span> I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_22">22&#160;</span> And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN18_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?
<span class="verse" id="GN18_24">24&#160;</span> Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that <span class='add'>are</span> therein?
<span class="verse" id="GN18_25">25&#160;</span> That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
<span class="verse" id="GN18_26">26&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_27">27&#160;</span> And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which <span class='add'>am but</span> dust and ashes:
<span class="verse" id="GN18_28">28&#160;</span> Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy all the city for <span class='add'>lack of</span> five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I will not destroy <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_29">29&#160;</span> And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do <span class='add'>it</span> for forty’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_30">30&#160;</span> And he said <span class='add'>unto him</span>, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do <span class='add'>it</span>, if I find thirty there.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_31">31&#160;</span> And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy <span class='add'>it</span> for twenty’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_32">32&#160;</span> And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy <span class='add'>it</span> for ten’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="GN18_33">33&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_1">1&#160;</span> And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing <span class='add'>them</span> rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground;
<span class="verse" id="GN19_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant’s house, and tarry all night, and <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the street all night.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_3">3&#160;</span> And he pressed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_4">4&#160;</span>¶ But before they lay down, the men of the city, <span class='add'>even</span> the men of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people from every quarter:
<span class="verse" id="GN19_5">5&#160;</span> And they called unto Lot, and said unto him, Where <span class='add'>are</span> the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_6">6&#160;</span> And Lot went out at the door unto them, and shut the door after him,
<span class="verse" id="GN19_7">7&#160;</span> And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_8">8&#160;</span> Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as <span class='add'>is</span> good in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_9">9&#160;</span> And they said, Stand back. And they said <span class='add'>again</span>, This one <span class='add'>fellow</span> came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man, <span class='add'>even</span> Lot, and came near to break the door.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_10">10&#160;</span> But the men put forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_11">11&#160;</span> And they smote the men <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that <span class='add'>were</span> at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the door. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring <span class='add'>them</span> out of this place:
<span class="verse" id="GN19_13">13&#160;</span> For we will destroy this place, because the <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cry of them is waxen great before the face of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sent us to destroy it.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_14">14&#160;</span> And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will destroy this city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are here; lest thou be consumed in the <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>iniquity of the city.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_16">16&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_18">18&#160;</span> And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:
<span class="verse" id="GN19_19">19&#160;</span> Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die:
<span class="verse" id="GN19_20">20&#160;</span> Behold now, this city <span class='add'>is</span> near to flee unto, and it <span class='add'>is</span> a little one: Oh, let me escape thither, (<span class='add'>is</span> it not a little one?) and my soul shall live.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_21">21&#160;</span> And he said unto him, See, I have accepted <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thee concerning this thing <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>also, that I will not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_22">22&#160;</span> Haste thee, escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_23">23&#160;</span>¶ The sun was <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_24">24&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> out of heaven;
<span class="verse" id="GN19_25">25&#160;</span> And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_26">26&#160;</span>¶ But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="GN19_28">28&#160;</span> And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN19_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_31">31&#160;</span> And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father <span class='add'>is</span> old, and <span class='add'>there is</span> not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth:
<span class="verse" id="GN19_32">32&#160;</span> Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_33">33&#160;</span> And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_34">34&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, <span class='add'>and</span> lie with him, that we may preserve seed of our father.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_35">35&#160;</span> And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_36">36&#160;</span> Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_37">37&#160;</span> And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same <span class='add'>is</span> the father of the Moabites unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="GN19_38">38&#160;</span> And the younger, she also bare a son, and called his name Ben-ammi: the same <span class='add'>is</span> the father of the children of Ammon unto this day.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN20_1">1&#160;</span> And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_2">2&#160;</span> And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She <span class='add'>is</span> my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN20_3">3&#160;</span> But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou <span class='add'>art but</span> a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a man’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_4">4&#160;</span> But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation?
<span class="verse" id="GN20_5">5&#160;</span> Said he not unto me, She <span class='add'>is</span> my sister? and she, even she herself said, He <span class='add'>is</span> my brother: in the <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>integrity of my heart and innocency of my hands have I done this.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_6">6&#160;</span> And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore restore the man <span class='add'>his</span> wife; for he <span class='add'>is</span> a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore <span class='add'>her</span> not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that <span class='add'>are</span> thine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN20_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_9">9&#160;</span> Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_10">10&#160;</span> And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing?
<span class="verse" id="GN20_11">11&#160;</span> And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God <span class='add'>is</span> not in this place; and they will slay me for my wife’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_12">12&#160;</span> And yet indeed <span class='add'>she is</span> my sister; she <span class='add'>is</span> the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_13">13&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father’s house, that I said unto her, This <span class='add'>is</span> thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shall come, <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>say of me, He <span class='add'>is</span> my brother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN20_14">14&#160;</span> And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave <span class='add'>them</span> unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_15">15&#160;</span> And Abimelech said, Behold, my land <span class='add'>is</span> before thee: dwell <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>where it pleaseth thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_16">16&#160;</span> And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver: behold, he <span class='add'>is</span> to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that <span class='add'>are</span> with thee, and with all <span class='add'>other:</span> thus she was reproved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN20_17">17&#160;</span>¶ So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare <span class='add'>children</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN20_18">18&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham’s wife.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> visited Sarah as he had said, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did unto Sarah <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as he had spoken.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_2">2&#160;</span> For Sarah <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_3">3&#160;</span> And Abraham called the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_4">4&#160;</span> And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as God had commanded him.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_5">5&#160;</span> And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, <span class='add'>so that</span> all that hear will laugh with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_7">7&#160;</span> And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born <span class='add'>him</span> a son in his old age.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_8">8&#160;</span> And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the <span class='add'>same</span> day that Isaac was weaned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_10">10&#160;</span> Wherefore she said unto Abraham, <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my son, <span class='add'>even</span> with Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_11">11&#160;</span> And the thing was very grievous in Abraham’s sight because of his son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_13">13&#160;</span> And also of the son of the bondwoman will I make a nation, because he <span class='add'>is</span> thy seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_14">14&#160;</span> And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> unto Hagar, putting <span class='add'>it</span> on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beer-sheba.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_15">15&#160;</span> And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_16">16&#160;</span> And she went, and sat her down over against <span class='add'>him</span> a good way off, as it were a bowshot: for she said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against <span class='add'>him</span>, and lift up her voice, and wept.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_17">17&#160;</span> And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he <span class='add'>is</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_18">18&#160;</span> Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_19">19&#160;</span> And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_20">20&#160;</span> And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an archer.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_21">21&#160;</span> And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God <span class='add'>is</span> with thee in all that thou doest:
<span class="verse" id="GN21_23">23&#160;</span> Now therefore swear unto me here by God <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son’s son: <span class='add'>but</span> according to the kindness that I have done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_24">24&#160;</span> And Abraham said, I will swear.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_25">25&#160;</span> And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech’s servants had violently taken away.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_26">26&#160;</span> And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing: neither didst thou tell me, neither yet heard I <span class='add'>of it</span>, but to day.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_27">27&#160;</span> And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_28">28&#160;</span> And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_29">29&#160;</span> And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What <span class='add'>mean</span> these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves?
<span class="verse" id="GN21_30">30&#160;</span> And he said, For <span class='add'>these</span> seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have digged this well.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_31">31&#160;</span> Wherefore he called that place <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beer-sheba; because there they sware both of them.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_32">32&#160;</span> Thus they made a covenant at Beer-sheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN21_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>Abraham</span> planted a <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>grove in Beer-sheba, and called there on the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the everlasting God.
<span class="verse" id="GN21_34">34&#160;</span> And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines’ land many days.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN22_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after these things, that <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Behold, <span class='add'>here</span> I <span class='add'>am</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, Take now thy son, thine only <span class='add'>son</span> Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN22_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_4">4&#160;</span> Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_5">5&#160;</span> And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_6">6&#160;</span> And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_7">7&#160;</span> And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Here <span class='add'>am</span> I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the wood: but where <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb for a burnt offering?
<span class="verse" id="GN22_8">8&#160;</span> And Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both of them together.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_9">9&#160;</span> And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>laid him on the altar upon the wood.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_10">10&#160;</span> And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN22_11">11&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only <span class='add'>son</span> from me.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_13">13&#160;</span> And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind <span class='add'>him</span> a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_14">14&#160;</span> And Abraham called the name of that place <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jehovah-jireh: as it is said <span class='add'>to</span> this day, In the mount of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> it shall be seen.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN22_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time,
<span class="verse" id="GN22_16">16&#160;</span> And said, <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>By myself have I sworn, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only <span class='add'>son:</span>
<span class="verse" id="GN22_17">17&#160;</span> That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the sea <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies;
<span class="verse" id="GN22_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_19">19&#160;</span> So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beer-sheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN22_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor;
<span class="verse" id="GN22_21">21&#160;</span> Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
<span class="verse" id="GN22_22">22&#160;</span> And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_23">23&#160;</span> And Bethuel begat <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham’s brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN22_24">24&#160;</span> And his concubine, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN23_1">1&#160;</span> And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: <span class='add'>these were</span> the years of the life of Sarah.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_2">2&#160;</span> And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba; the same <span class='add'>is</span> Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN23_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN23_4">4&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_5">5&#160;</span> And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,
<span class="verse" id="GN23_6">6&#160;</span> Hear us, my lord: thou <span class='add'>art</span> <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_7">7&#160;</span> And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, <span class='add'>even</span> to the children of Heth.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_8">8&#160;</span> And he communed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
<span class="verse" id="GN23_9">9&#160;</span> That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the end of his field; for <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as much money as it is worth he shall give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_10">10&#160;</span> And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>audience of the children of Heth, <span class='add'>even</span> of all that went in at the <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>gate of his city, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN23_11">11&#160;</span> Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that <span class='add'>is</span> therein, I give it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury thy dead.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_12">12&#160;</span> And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_13">13&#160;</span> And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou <span class='add'>wilt give it</span>, I pray thee, hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take <span class='add'>it</span> of me, and I will bury my dead there.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_14">14&#160;</span> And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him,
<span class="verse" id="GN23_15">15&#160;</span> My lord, hearken unto me: the land <span class='add'>is worth</span> four hundred shekels of silver; what <span class='add'>is</span> that betwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN23_16">16&#160;</span> And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current <span class='add'>money</span> with the merchant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN23_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the field of Ephron, which <span class='add'>was</span> in Machpelah, which <span class='add'>was</span> before Mamre, the field, and the cave which <span class='add'>was</span> therein, and all the trees that <span class='add'>were</span> in the field, that <span class='add'>were</span> in all the borders round about, were made sure
<span class="verse" id="GN23_18">18&#160;</span> Unto Abraham for a possession in the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the gate of his city.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_19">19&#160;</span> And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same <span class='add'>is</span> Hebron in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN23_20">20&#160;</span> And the field, and the cave that <span class='add'>is</span> therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_1">1&#160;</span> And Abraham was old, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>well stricken in age: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had blessed Abraham in all things.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_2">2&#160;</span> And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh:
<span class="verse" id="GN24_3">3&#160;</span> And I will make thee swear by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell:
<span class="verse" id="GN24_4">4&#160;</span> But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_5">5&#160;</span> And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest?
<span class="verse" id="GN24_6">6&#160;</span> And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_7">7&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of heaven, which took me from my father’s house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_8">8&#160;</span> And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_9">9&#160;</span> And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for all the goods of his master <span class='add'>were</span> in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_11">11&#160;</span> And he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at the time of the evening, <span class='add'>even</span> the time <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that women go out to draw <span class='add'>water</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master Abraham.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_13">13&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I stand <span class='add'>here</span> by the well of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water:
<span class="verse" id="GN24_14">14&#160;</span> And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: <span class='add'>let the same be</span> she <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham’s brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_16">16&#160;</span> And the damsel <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_17">17&#160;</span> And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_18">18&#160;</span> And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_19">19&#160;</span> And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I will draw <span class='add'>water</span> for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_20">20&#160;</span> And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw <span class='add'>water</span>, and drew for all his camels.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_21">21&#160;</span> And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made his journey prosperous or not.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_22">22&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that the man took a golden <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>earring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span> weight of gold;
<span class="verse" id="GN24_23">23&#160;</span> And said, Whose daughter <span class='add'>art</span> thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room <span class='add'>in</span> thy father’s house for us to lodge in?
<span class="verse" id="GN24_24">24&#160;</span> And she said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_25">25&#160;</span> She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_26">26&#160;</span> And the man bowed down his head, and worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_27">27&#160;</span> And he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I <span class='add'>being</span> in the way, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> led me to the house of my master’s brethren.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_28">28&#160;</span> And the damsel ran, and told <span class='add'>them of</span> her mother’s house these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Rebekah had a brother, and his name <span class='add'>was</span> Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_30">30&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister’s hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels at the well.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_31">31&#160;</span> And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and room for the camels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet, and the men’s feet that <span class='add'>were</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_33">33&#160;</span> And there was set <span class='add'>meat</span> before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have told mine errand. And he said, Speak on.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_34">34&#160;</span> And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span> Abraham’s servant.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_35">35&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and asses.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_36">36&#160;</span> And Sarah my master’s wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_37">37&#160;</span> And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell:
<span class="verse" id="GN24_38">38&#160;</span> But thou shalt go unto my father’s house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_39">39&#160;</span> And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman will not follow me.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_40">40&#160;</span> And he said unto me, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, before whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father’s house:
<span class="verse" id="GN24_41">41&#160;</span> Then shalt thou be clear from <span class='add'>this</span> my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee <span class='add'>one</span>, thou shalt be clear from my oath.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_42">42&#160;</span> And I came this day unto the well, and said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go:
<span class="verse" id="GN24_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw <span class='add'>water</span>, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to drink;
<span class="verse" id="GN24_44">44&#160;</span> And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels: <span class='add'>let</span> the same <span class='add'>be</span> the woman whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath appointed out for my master’s son.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_45">45&#160;</span> And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew <span class='add'>water:</span> and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_46">46&#160;</span> And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her <span class='add'>shoulder</span>, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_47">47&#160;</span> And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor’s son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_48">48&#160;</span> And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and blessed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master’s brother’s daughter unto his son.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_49">49&#160;</span> And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_50">50&#160;</span> Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceedeth from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_51">51&#160;</span> Behold, Rebekah <span class='add'>is</span> before thee, take <span class='add'>her</span>, and go, and let her be thy master’s son’s wife, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_52">52&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that, when Abraham’s servant heard their words, he worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>bowing himself</span> to the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_53">53&#160;</span> And the servant brought forth <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave <span class='add'>them</span> to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_54">54&#160;</span> And they did eat and drink, he and the men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Send me away unto my master.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_55">55&#160;</span> And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>a few</span> days, at the least ten; after that she shall go.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_56">56&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_57">57&#160;</span> And they said, We will call the damsel, and enquire at her mouth.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_58">58&#160;</span> And they called Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_59">59&#160;</span> And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham’s servant, and his men.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_60">60&#160;</span> And they blessed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> our sister, be thou <span class='add'>the mother</span> of thousands of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_61">61&#160;</span>¶ And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went his way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN24_62">62&#160;</span> And Isaac came from the way of the <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>well Lahai-roi; for he dwelt in the south country.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_63">63&#160;</span> And Isaac went out <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels <span class='add'>were</span> coming.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_64">64&#160;</span> And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_65">65&#160;</span>For she <span class='add'>had</span> said unto the servant, What man <span class='add'>is</span> this that walketh in the field to meet us? And the servant <span class='add'>had</span> said, It <span class='add'>is</span> my master: therefore she took a vail, and covered herself.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_66">66&#160;</span> And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
<span class="verse" id="GN24_67">67&#160;</span> And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah’s tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother’s <span class='add'>death</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_1">1&#160;</span> Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name <span class='add'>was</span> Keturah.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_2">2&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_3">3&#160;</span> And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_4">4&#160;</span> And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah. All these <span class='add'>were</span> the children of Keturah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_6">6&#160;</span> But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_7">7&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the days of the years of Abraham’s life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_8">8&#160;</span> Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full <span class='add'>of years;</span> and was gathered to his people.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_9">9&#160;</span> And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which <span class='add'>is</span> before Mamre;
<span class="verse" id="GN25_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>well Lahai-roi. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Ishmael, Abraham’s son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s handmaid, bare unto Abraham:
<span class="verse" id="GN25_13">13&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
<span class="verse" id="GN25_14">14&#160;</span> And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
<span class="verse" id="GN25_15">15&#160;</span> Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah:
<span class="verse" id="GN25_16">16&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Ishmael, and these <span class='add'>are</span> their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_17">17&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_18">18&#160;</span> And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that <span class='add'>is</span> before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: <span class='add'>and</span> he <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>died in the presence of all his brethren.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Isaac, Abraham’s son: Abraham begat Isaac:
<span class="verse" id="GN25_20">20&#160;</span> And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan-aram, the sister to Laban the Syrian.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_21">21&#160;</span> And Isaac intreated the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for his wife, because she <span class='add'>was</span> barren: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_22">22&#160;</span> And the children struggled together within her; and she said, If <span class='add'>it be</span> so, why <span class='add'>am</span> I thus? And she went to enquire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_23">23&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto her, Two nations <span class='add'>are</span> in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and <span class='add'>the one</span> people shall be stronger than <span class='add'>the other</span> people; and <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the elder shall serve the younger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, <span class='add'>there were</span> twins in her womb.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_25">25&#160;</span> And the first came out red, all over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_26">26&#160;</span> And after that came his brother out, and <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his hand took hold on Esau’s heel; and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac <span class='add'>was</span> threescore years old when she bare them.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_27">27&#160;</span> And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob <span class='add'>was</span> a plain man, dwelling in tents.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_28">28&#160;</span> And Isaac loved Esau, because <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he did eat of <span class='add'>his</span> venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN25_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he <span class='add'>was</span> faint:
<span class="verse" id="GN25_30">30&#160;</span> And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with that same red <span class='add'>pottage;</span> for I <span class='add'>am</span> faint: therefore was his name called Edom.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_31">31&#160;</span> And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_32">32&#160;</span> And Esau said, Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at the point to die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?
<span class="verse" id="GN25_33">33&#160;</span> And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he sold his birthright unto Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="GN25_34">34&#160;</span> Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised <span class='add'>his</span> birthright.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN26_1">1&#160;</span> And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of:
<span class="verse" id="GN26_3">3&#160;</span> Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will give all these countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father;
<span class="verse" id="GN26_4">4&#160;</span> And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blessed;
<span class="verse" id="GN26_5">5&#160;</span> Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN26_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Isaac dwelt in Gerar:
<span class="verse" id="GN26_7">7&#160;</span> And the men of the place asked <span class='add'>him</span> of his wife; and he said, She <span class='add'>is</span> my sister: for he feared to say, <span class='add'>She is</span> my wife; lest, <span class='add'>said he</span>, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah; because she <span class='add'>was</span> fair to look upon.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac <span class='add'>was</span> sporting with Rebekah his wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_9">9&#160;</span> And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she <span class='add'>is</span> thy wife: and how saidst thou, She <span class='add'>is</span> my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_10">10&#160;</span> And Abimelech said, What <span class='add'>is</span> this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_11">11&#160;</span> And Abimelech charged all <span class='add'>his</span> people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN26_12">12&#160;</span> Then Isaac sowed in that land, and <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>received in the same year an hundredfold: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed him.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_13">13&#160;</span> And the man waxed great, and <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>went forward, and grew until he became very great:
<span class="verse" id="GN26_14">14&#160;</span> For he had possession of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>servants: and the Philistines envied him.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_15">15&#160;</span> For all the wells which his father’s servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped them, and filled them with earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_16">16&#160;</span> And Abimelech said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN26_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_18">18&#160;</span> And Isaac digged again the wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_19">19&#160;</span> And Isaac’s servants digged in the valley, and found there a well of <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>springing water.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_20">20&#160;</span> And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isaac’s herdmen, saying, The water <span class='add'>is</span> ours: and he called the name of the well <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Esek; because they strove with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_21">21&#160;</span> And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called the name of it <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Sitnah.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_22">22&#160;</span> And he removed from thence, and digged another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of it <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Rehoboth; and he said, For now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_23">23&#160;</span> And he went up from thence to Beer-sheba.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_24">24&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto him the same night, and said, I <span class='add'>am</span> the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_25">25&#160;</span> And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac’s servants digged a well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN26_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_27">27&#160;</span> And Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?
<span class="verse" id="GN26_28">28&#160;</span> And they said, <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>We saw certainly that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with thee: and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, <span class='add'>even</span> betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with thee;
<span class="verse" id="GN26_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace: thou <span class='add'>art</span> now the blessed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_30">30&#160;</span> And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_31">31&#160;</span> And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_32">32&#160;</span> And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac’s servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.
<span class="verse" id="GN26_33">33&#160;</span> And he called it <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Shebah: therefore the name of the city <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beer-sheba unto this day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN26_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite:
<span class="verse" id="GN26_35">35&#160;</span> Which <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>were <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN27_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, <span class='add'>here am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_3">3&#160;</span> Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>take me <span class='add'>some</span> venison;
<span class="verse" id="GN27_4">4&#160;</span> And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring <span class='add'>it</span> to me, that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_5">5&#160;</span> And Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt <span class='add'>for</span> venison, <span class='add'>and</span> to bring <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN27_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN27_7">7&#160;</span> Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before my death.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_8">8&#160;</span> Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_9">9&#160;</span> Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring <span class='add'>it</span> to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bless thee before his death.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_11">11&#160;</span> And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother <span class='add'>is</span> a hairy man, and I <span class='add'>am</span> a smooth man:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_12">12&#160;</span> My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_13">13&#160;</span> And his mother said unto him, Upon me <span class='add'>be</span> thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_14">14&#160;</span> And he went, and fetched, and brought <span class='add'>them</span> to his mother: and his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_15">15&#160;</span> And Rebekah took <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which <span class='add'>were</span> with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_16">16&#160;</span> And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_17">17&#160;</span> And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN27_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I; who <span class='add'>art</span> thou, my son?
<span class="verse" id="GN27_19">19&#160;</span> And Jacob said unto his father, I <span class='add'>am</span> Esau thy firstborn; I have done according as thou badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_20">20&#160;</span> And Isaac said unto his son, How <span class='add'>is it</span> that thou hast found <span class='add'>it</span> so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God brought <span class='add'>it</span> <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to me.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_21">21&#160;</span> And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou <span class='add'>be</span> my very son Esau or not.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_22">22&#160;</span> And Jacob went near unto Isaac his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice <span class='add'>is</span> Jacob’s voice, but the hands <span class='add'>are</span> the hands of Esau.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_23">23&#160;</span> And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau’s hands: so he blessed him.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_24">24&#160;</span> And he said, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou my very son Esau? And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_25">25&#160;</span> And he said, Bring <span class='add'>it</span> near to me, and I will eat of my son’s venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought <span class='add'>it</span> near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine, and he drank.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_26">26&#160;</span> And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_27">27&#160;</span> And he came near, and kissed him: and he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son <span class='add'>is</span> as the smell of a field which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine:
<span class="verse" id="GN27_29">29&#160;</span> Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother’s sons bow down to thee: cursed <span class='add'>be</span> every one that curseth thee, and blessed <span class='add'>be</span> he that blesseth thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN27_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_31">31&#160;</span> And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son’s venison, that thy soul may bless me.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_32">32&#160;</span> And Isaac his father said unto him, Who <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span> thy son, thy firstborn Esau.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_33">33&#160;</span> And Isaac <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who? where <span class='add'>is</span> he that hath <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taken venison, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> me, and I have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, <span class='add'>and</span> he shall be blessed.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_34">34&#160;</span> And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, <span class='add'>even</span> me also, O my father.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_35">35&#160;</span> And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_36">36&#160;</span> And he said, Is not he rightly named <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jacob? for he hath supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a blessing for me?
<span class="verse" id="GN27_37">37&#160;</span> And Isaac answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sustained him: and what shall I do now unto thee, my son?
<span class="verse" id="GN27_38">38&#160;</span> And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, <span class='add'>even</span> me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and wept.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_39">39&#160;</span> And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thy dwelling shall be <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;
<span class="verse" id="GN27_40">40&#160;</span> And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from off thy neck. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN27_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his father blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>then will I slay my brother Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_42">42&#160;</span> And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, <span class='add'>purposing</span> to kill thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN27_43">43&#160;</span> Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; and arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran;
<span class="verse" id="GN27_44">44&#160;</span> And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother’s fury turn away;
<span class="verse" id="GN27_45">45&#160;</span> Until thy brother’s anger turn away from thee, and he forget <span class='add'>that</span> which thou hast done to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from thence: why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?
<span class="verse" id="GN27_46">46&#160;</span> And Rebekah said to Isaac, <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these <span class='add'>which are</span> of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN28_1">1&#160;</span> And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Arise, go to Padan-aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother’s father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban thy mother’s brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_3">3&#160;</span> And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a multitude of people;
<span class="verse" id="GN28_4">4&#160;</span> And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_5">5&#160;</span> And Isaac sent away Jacob: and he went to Padan-aram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob’s and Esau’s mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN28_6">6&#160;</span>¶ When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away to Padan-aram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan;
<span class="verse" id="GN28_7">7&#160;</span> And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padan-aram;
<span class="verse" id="GN28_8">8&#160;</span> And Esau seeing that the daughters of Canaan <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleased not Isaac his father;
<span class="verse" id="GN28_9">9&#160;</span> Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham’s son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN28_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba, and went toward <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Haran.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_11">11&#160;</span> And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that place, and put <span class='add'>them for</span> his pillows, and lay down in that place to sleep.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_12">12&#160;</span> And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood above it, and said, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed;
<span class="verse" id="GN28_14">14&#160;</span> And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spread abroad <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thee and <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_15">15&#160;</span>And, behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee, and will keep thee in all <span class='add'>places</span> whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I have done <span class='add'>that</span> which I have spoken to thee of. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN28_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is in this place; and I knew <span class='add'>it</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_17">17&#160;</span> And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful <span class='add'>is</span> this place! this <span class='add'>is</span> none other but the house of God, and this <span class='add'>is</span> the gate of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_18">18&#160;</span> And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put <span class='add'>for</span> his pillows, and set it up <span class='add'>for</span> a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_19">19&#160;</span> And he called the name of that place <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beth-el: but the name of that city <span class='add'>was called</span> Luz at the first.
<span class="verse" id="GN28_20">20&#160;</span> And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,
<span class="verse" id="GN28_21">21&#160;</span> So that I come again to my father’s house in peace; then shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be my God:
<span class="verse" id="GN28_22">22&#160;</span> And this stone, which I have set <span class='add'>for</span> a pillar, shall be God’s house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto thee.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN29_1">1&#160;</span> Then Jacob <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>went on his journey, and came into the land of the <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>people of the east.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_2">2&#160;</span> And he looked, and behold a well in the field, and, lo, there <span class='add'>were</span> three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone <span class='add'>was</span> upon the well’s mouth.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_3">3&#160;</span> And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well’s mouth in his place.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_4">4&#160;</span> And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence <span class='add'>be</span> ye? And they said, Of Haran <span class='add'>are</span> we.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_5">5&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto them, <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>Is</span> he well? And they said, <span class='add'>He is</span> well: and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the sheep.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_7">7&#160;</span> And he said, Lo, <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>it is</span> yet high day, neither <span class='add'>is it</span> time that the cattle should be gathered together: water ye the sheep, and go <span class='add'>and</span> feed <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_8">8&#160;</span> And they said, We cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and <span class='add'>till</span> they roll the stone from the well’s mouth; then we water the sheep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN29_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father’s sheep: for she kept them.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother’s brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother’s brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well’s mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother’s brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_11">11&#160;</span> And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_12">12&#160;</span> And Jacob told Rachel that he <span class='add'>was</span> her father’s brother, and that he <span class='add'>was</span> Rebekah’s son: and she ran and told her father.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_13">13&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Laban heard the <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tidings of Jacob his sister’s son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_14">14&#160;</span> And Laban said to him, Surely thou <span class='add'>art</span> my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the space of a month.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN29_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou <span class='add'>art</span> my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what <span class='add'>shall</span> thy wages <span class='add'>be</span>?
<span class="verse" id="GN29_16">16&#160;</span> And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder <span class='add'>was</span> Leah, and the name of the younger <span class='add'>was</span> Rachel.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_17">17&#160;</span> Leah <span class='add'>was</span> tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_18">18&#160;</span> And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_19">19&#160;</span> And Laban said, <span class='add'>It is</span> better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man: abide with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_20">20&#160;</span> And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they seemed unto him <span class='add'>but</span> a few days, for the love he had to her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN29_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob said unto Laban, Give <span class='add'>me</span> my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_22">22&#160;</span> And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_23">23&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_24">24&#160;</span> And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid <span class='add'>for</span> an handmaid.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_25">25&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it <span class='add'>was</span> Leah: and he said to Laban, What <span class='add'>is</span> this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me?
<span class="verse" id="GN29_26">26&#160;</span> And Laban said, It must not be so done in our <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>country, to give the younger before the firstborn.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_27">27&#160;</span> Fulfil her week, and we will give thee this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_28">28&#160;</span> And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_29">29&#160;</span> And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_30">30&#160;</span> And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN29_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saw that Leah <span class='add'>was</span> hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel <span class='add'>was</span> barren.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_32">32&#160;</span> And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she called his name <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Reuben: for she said, Surely the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_33">33&#160;</span> And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath heard that I <span class='add'>was</span> hated, he hath therefore given me this <span class='add'>son</span> also: and she called his name <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Simeon.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_34">34&#160;</span> And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons: therefore was his name called <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Levi.
<span class="verse" id="GN29_35">35&#160;</span> And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now will I praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: therefore she called his name <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Judah; and <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>left bearing.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN30_1">1&#160;</span> And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_2">2&#160;</span> And Jacob’s anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, <span class='add'>Am</span> I in God’s stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
<span class="verse" id="GN30_3">3&#160;</span> And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have children by her.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_4">4&#160;</span> And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_5">5&#160;</span> And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_6">6&#160;</span> And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore called she his name <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Dan.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_7">7&#160;</span> And Bilhah Rachel’s maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_8">8&#160;</span> And Rachel said, With <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she called his name <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Naphtali.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_9">9&#160;</span> When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_10">10&#160;</span> And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare Jacob a son.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_11">11&#160;</span> And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Gad.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_12">12&#160;</span> And Zilpah Leah’s maid bare Jacob a second son.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_13">13&#160;</span> And Leah said, <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his name <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Asher.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN30_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son’s mandrakes.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_15">15&#160;</span> And she said unto her, <span class='add'>Is it</span> a small matter that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son’s mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy son’s mandrakes.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_16">16&#160;</span> And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son’s mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_17">17&#160;</span> And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_18">18&#160;</span> And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband: and she called his name <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Issachar.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_19">19&#160;</span> And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_20">20&#160;</span> And Leah said, God hath endued me <span class='add'>with</span> a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have born him six sons: and she called his name <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zebulun.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_21">21&#160;</span> And afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Dinah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN30_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_23">23&#160;</span> And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach:
<span class="verse" id="GN30_24">24&#160;</span> And she called his name <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Joseph; and said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall add to me another son.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN30_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_26">26&#160;</span> Give <span class='add'>me</span> my wives and my children, for whom I have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_27">27&#160;</span> And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, <span class='add'>tarry: for</span> I have learned by experience that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed me for thy sake.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_28">28&#160;</span> And he said, Appoint me thy wages, and I will give <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_29">29&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_30">30&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it was</span> little which thou hadst before I <span class='add'>came</span>, and it is <span class='add'>now</span> <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>increased unto a multitude; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed thee <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>since my coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?
<span class="verse" id="GN30_31">31&#160;</span> And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again feed <span class='add'>and</span> keep thy flock:
<span class="verse" id="GN30_32">32&#160;</span> I will pass through all thy flock to day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats: and <span class='add'>of such</span> shall be my hire.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_33">33&#160;</span> So shall my righteousness answer for me <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in time to come, when it shall come for my hire before thy face: every one that <span class='add'>is</span> not speckled and spotted among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted stolen with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_34">34&#160;</span> And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be according to thy word.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_35">35&#160;</span> And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats that were speckled and spotted, <span class='add'>and</span> every one that had <span class='add'>some</span> white in it, and all the brown among the sheep, and gave <span class='add'>them</span> into the hand of his sons.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_36">36&#160;</span> And he set three days’ journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban’s flocks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN30_37">37&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white appear which <span class='add'>was</span> in the rods.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_38">38&#160;</span> And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_39">39&#160;</span> And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_40">40&#160;</span> And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban’s cattle.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_41">41&#160;</span> And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_42">42&#160;</span> But when the cattle were feeble, he put <span class='add'>them</span> not in: so the feebler were Laban’s, and the stronger Jacob’s.
<span class="verse" id="GN30_43">43&#160;</span> And the man increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN31_1">1&#160;</span> And he heard the words of Laban’s sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away all that <span class='add'>was</span> our father’s; and of <span class='add'>that</span> which <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><span class='add'>was</span> our father’s hath he gotten all this glory.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_2">2&#160;</span> And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it <span class='add'>was</span> not toward him <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as before.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_4">4&#160;</span> And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock,
<span class="verse" id="GN31_5">5&#160;</span> And said unto them, I see your father’s countenance, that it <span class='add'>is</span> not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_6">6&#160;</span> And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_7">7&#160;</span> And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but God suffered him not to hurt me.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_8">8&#160;</span> If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle ringstraked.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_9">9&#160;</span> Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father, and given <span class='add'>them</span> to me.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the time that the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rams which leaped upon the cattle <span class='add'>were</span> ringstraked, speckled, and grisled.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_11">11&#160;</span> And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Jacob: And I said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the cattle <span class='add'>are</span> ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all that Laban doeth unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_13">13&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the God of Beth-el, <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>where thou anointedst the pillar, <span class='add'>and</span> where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_14">14&#160;</span> And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, <span class='add'>Is there</span> yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father’s house?
<span class="verse" id="GN31_15">15&#160;</span> Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_16">16&#160;</span> For all the riches which God hath taken from our father, that <span class='add'>is</span> ours, and our children’s: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN31_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels;
<span class="verse" id="GN31_18">18&#160;</span> And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in Padan-aram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_19">19&#160;</span> And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>images that <span class='add'>were</span> her father’s.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_20">20&#160;</span> And Jacob stole away <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_21">21&#160;</span> So he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the river, and set his face <span class='add'>toward</span> the mount Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_22">22&#160;</span> And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_23">23&#160;</span> And he took his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days’ journey; and they overtook him in the mount Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_24">24&#160;</span> And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob <a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>either good or bad.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN31_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_26">26&#160;</span> And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives <span class='add'>taken</span> with the sword?
<span class="verse" id="GN31_27">27&#160;</span> Wherefore didst thou flee away secretly, and <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp?
<span class="verse" id="GN31_28">28&#160;</span> And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done foolishly in <span class='add'>so</span> doing.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_29">29&#160;</span> It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or bad.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_30">30&#160;</span>And now, <span class='add'>though</span> thou wouldest needs be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father’s house, <span class='add'>yet</span> wherefore hast thou stolen my gods?
<span class="verse" id="GN31_31">31&#160;</span> And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_32">32&#160;</span> With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou what <span class='add'>is</span> thine with me, and take <span class='add'>it</span> to thee. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_33">33&#160;</span> And Laban went into Jacob’s tent, and into Leah’s tent, and into the two maidservants’ tents; but he found <span class='add'>them</span> not. Then went he out of Leah’s tent, and entered into Rachel’s tent.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_34">34&#160;</span> Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel’s furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>searched all the tent, but found <span class='add'>them</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_35">35&#160;</span> And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of women <span class='add'>is</span> upon me. And he searched, but found not the images. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN31_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What <span class='add'>is</span> my trespass? what <span class='add'>is</span> my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me?
<span class="verse" id="GN31_37">37&#160;</span> Whereas thou hast <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff? set <span class='add'>it</span> here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_38">38&#160;</span> This twenty years <span class='add'>have</span> I <span class='add'>been</span> with thee; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_39">39&#160;</span> That which was torn <span class='add'>of beasts</span> I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of <a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>my hand didst thou require it, <span class='add'>whether</span> stolen by day, or stolen by night.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Thus</span> I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_41">41&#160;</span> Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_42">42&#160;</span> Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked <span class='add'>thee</span> yesternight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN31_43">43&#160;</span>¶ And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, <span class='add'>These</span> daughters <span class='add'>are</span> my daughters, and <span class='add'>these</span> children <span class='add'>are</span> my children, and <span class='add'>these</span> cattle <span class='add'>are</span> my cattle, and all that thou seest <span class='add'>is</span> mine: and what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born?
<span class="verse" id="GN31_44">44&#160;</span> Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_45">45&#160;</span> And Jacob took a stone, and set it up <span class='add'>for</span> a pillar.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_46">46&#160;</span> And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_47">47&#160;</span> And Laban called it <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Jegar-sahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_48">48&#160;</span> And Laban said, This heap <span class='add'>is</span> a witness between me and thee this day. Therefore was the name of it called Galeed;
<span class="verse" id="GN31_49">49&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Mizpah; for he said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_50">50&#160;</span> If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt take <span class='add'>other</span> wives beside my daughters, no man <span class='add'>is</span> with us; see, God <span class='add'>is</span> witness betwixt me and thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_51">51&#160;</span> And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold <span class='add'>this</span> pillar, which I have cast betwixt me and thee;
<span class="verse" id="GN31_52">52&#160;</span> This heap <span class='add'>be</span> witness, and <span class='add'>this</span> pillar <span class='add'>be</span> witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_53">53&#160;</span> The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_54">54&#160;</span> Then Jacob <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all night in the mount.
<span class="verse" id="GN31_55">55&#160;</span> And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN32_1">1&#160;</span> And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_2">2&#160;</span> And when Jacob saw them, he said, This <span class='add'>is</span> God’s host: and he called the name of that place <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Mahanaim.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN32_3">3&#160;</span> And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>country of Edom.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_4">4&#160;</span> And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now:
<span class="verse" id="GN32_5">5&#160;</span> And I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN32_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_7">7&#160;</span> Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he divided the people that <span class='add'>was</span> with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands;
<span class="verse" id="GN32_8">8&#160;</span> And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shall escape. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN32_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which saidst unto me, <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee:
<span class="verse" id="GN32_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_11">11&#160;</span> Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me, <span class='add'>and</span> the mother <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with the children.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_12">12&#160;</span> And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN32_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his brother;
<span class="verse" id="GN32_14">14&#160;</span> Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams,
<span class="verse" id="GN32_15">15&#160;</span> Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she asses, and ten foals.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_16">16&#160;</span> And he delivered <span class='add'>them</span> into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_17">17&#160;</span> And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose <span class='add'>art</span> thou? and whither goest thou? and whose <span class='add'>are</span> these before thee?
<span class="verse" id="GN32_18">18&#160;</span> Then thou shalt say, <span class='add'>They be</span> thy servant Jacob’s; it <span class='add'>is</span> a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he <span class='add'>is</span> behind us.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_19">19&#160;</span> And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_20">20&#160;</span> And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob <span class='add'>is</span> behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I will see his face; peradventure he will accept <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of me.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_21">21&#160;</span> So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_22">22&#160;</span> And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford Jabbok.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_23">23&#160;</span> And he took them, and <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sent them over the brook, and sent over that he had.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN32_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>breaking of the day.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_25">25&#160;</span> And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the hollow of Jacob’s thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_26">26&#160;</span> And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, <a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will not let thee go, except thou bless me.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_27">27&#160;</span> And he said unto him, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy name? And he said, Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_28">28&#160;</span> And he said, <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_29">29&#160;</span> And Jacob asked <span class='add'>him</span>, and said, Tell <span class='add'>me</span>, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Wherefore <span class='add'>is</span> it <span class='add'>that</span> thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed him there.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_30">30&#160;</span> And Jacob called the name of the place <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Peniel: for I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_31">31&#160;</span> And as he passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.
<span class="verse" id="GN32_32">32&#160;</span> Therefore the children of Israel eat not <span class='add'>of</span> the sinew which shrank, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hollow of Jacob’s thigh in the sinew that shrank.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN33_1">1&#160;</span> And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_2">2&#160;</span> And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_3">3&#160;</span> And he passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_4">4&#160;</span> And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN33_5">5&#160;</span> And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who <span class='add'>are</span> those <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with thee? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_6">6&#160;</span> Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_7">7&#160;</span> And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_8">8&#160;</span> And he said, <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>What <span class='add'>meanest</span> thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, <span class='add'>These are</span> to find grace in the sight of my lord.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_9">9&#160;</span> And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>keep that thou hast unto thyself.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_10">10&#160;</span> And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_11">11&#160;</span> Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_13">13&#160;</span> And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children <span class='add'>are</span> tender, and the flocks and herds with young <span class='add'>are</span> with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, all the flock will die.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_14">14&#160;</span> Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly, <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>according as the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_15">15&#160;</span> And Esau said, Let me now <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>leave with thee <span class='add'>some</span> of the folk that <span class='add'>are</span> with me. And he said, <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN33_16">16&#160;</span>¶ So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_17">17&#160;</span> And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Succoth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN33_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of <a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shechem, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Canaan, when he came from Padan-aram; and pitched his tent before the city.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_19">19&#160;</span> And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hamor, Shechem’s father, for an hundred <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pieces of money.
<span class="verse" id="GN33_20">20&#160;</span> And he erected there an altar, and called it <a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>El-elohe-Israel.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN34_1">1&#160;</span> And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_2">2&#160;</span> And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her, and lay with her, and <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>defiled her.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_3">3&#160;</span> And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>kindly unto the damsel.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_4">4&#160;</span> And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_5">5&#160;</span> And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN34_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to commune with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard <span class='add'>it:</span> and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob’s daughter; which thing ought not to be done.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_8">8&#160;</span> And Hamor communed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_9">9&#160;</span> And make ye marriages with us, <span class='add'>and</span> give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_10">10&#160;</span> And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_11">11&#160;</span> And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_12">12&#160;</span> Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_13">13&#160;</span> And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister:
<span class="verse" id="GN34_14">14&#160;</span> And they said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that <span class='add'>were</span> a reproach unto us:
<span class="verse" id="GN34_15">15&#160;</span> But in this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we <span class='add'>be</span>, that every male of you be circumcised;
<span class="verse" id="GN34_16">16&#160;</span> Then will we give our daughters unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with you, and we will become one people.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_17">17&#160;</span> But if ye will not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN34_18">18&#160;</span> And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor’s son.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_19">19&#160;</span> And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob’s daughter: and he <span class='add'>was</span> more honourable than all the house of his father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN34_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and communed with the men of their city, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN34_21">21&#160;</span> These men <span class='add'>are</span> peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, <span class='add'>it is</span> large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_22">22&#160;</span> Only herein will the men consent unto us for to dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they <span class='add'>are</span> circumcised.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Shall</span> not their cattle and their substance and every beast of theirs <span class='add'>be</span> ours? only let us consent unto them, and they will dwell with us.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_24">24&#160;</span> And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN34_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah’s brethren, took each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and <a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>slew all the males.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_26">26&#160;</span> And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem’s house, and went out.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_27">27&#160;</span> The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_28">28&#160;</span> They took their sheep, and their oxen, and their asses, and that which <span class='add'>was</span> in the city, and that which <span class='add'>was</span> in the field,
<span class="verse" id="GN34_29">29&#160;</span> And all their wealth, and all their little ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that <span class='add'>was</span> in the house.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_30">30&#160;</span> And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I <span class='add'>being</span> few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
<span class="verse" id="GN34_31">31&#160;</span> And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN35_1">1&#160;</span> And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Beth-el, and dwell there: and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_2">2&#160;</span> Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, Put away the strange gods that <span class='add'>are</span> among you, and be clean, and change your garments:
<span class="verse" id="GN35_3">3&#160;</span> And let us arise, and go up to Beth-el; and I will make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I went.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_4">4&#160;</span> And they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which <span class='add'>were</span> in their hand, and <span class='add'>all their</span> earrings which <span class='add'>were</span> in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which <span class='add'>was</span> by Shechem.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_5">5&#160;</span> And they journeyed: and the terror of God was upon the cities that <span class='add'>were</span> round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN35_6">6&#160;</span>¶ So Jacob came to Luz, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Canaan, that <span class='add'>is</span>, Beth-el, he and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_7">7&#160;</span> And he built there an altar, and <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>called the place <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>El-beth-el: because there God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_8">8&#160;</span> But Deborah Rebekah’s nurse died, and she was buried beneath Beth-el under an oak: and the name of it was called <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Allon-bachuth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN35_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padan-aram, and blessed him.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_10">10&#160;</span> And God said unto him, Thy name <span class='add'>is</span> Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but Israel shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_11">11&#160;</span> And God said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins;
<span class="verse" id="GN35_12">12&#160;</span> And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_13">13&#160;</span> And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_14">14&#160;</span> And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, <span class='add'>even</span> a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_15">15&#160;</span> And Jacob called the name of the place where God spake with him, Beth-el. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN35_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And they journeyed from Beth-el; and there was but <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a little way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_17">17&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she called his name <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ben-oni: but his father called him <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Benjamin.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_19">19&#160;</span> And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which <span class='add'>is</span> Beth-lehem.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_20">20&#160;</span> And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that <span class='add'>is</span> the pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN35_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_22">22&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lay with Bilhah his father’s concubine: and Israel heard <span class='add'>it</span>. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve:
<span class="verse" id="GN35_23">23&#160;</span> The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun:
<span class="verse" id="GN35_24">24&#160;</span> The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin:
<span class="verse" id="GN35_25">25&#160;</span> And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali:
<span class="verse" id="GN35_26">26&#160;</span> And the sons of Zilpah, Leah’s handmaid; Gad, and Asher: these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padan-aram. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN35_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which <span class='add'>is</span> Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_28">28&#160;</span> And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.
<span class="verse" id="GN35_29">29&#160;</span> And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>was gathered unto his people, <span class='add'>being</span> old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Esau, who <span class='add'>is</span> Edom.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_2">2&#160;</span> Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite;
<span class="verse" id="GN36_3">3&#160;</span> And Bashemath Ishmael’s daughter, sister of Nebajoth.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_4">4&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel;
<span class="verse" id="GN36_5">5&#160;</span> And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah: these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_6">6&#160;</span> And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>persons of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_7">7&#160;</span> For their riches were more than that they might dwell together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their cattle.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_8">8&#160;</span> Thus dwelt Esau in <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mount Seir: Esau <span class='add'>is</span> Edom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Esau the father of <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the Edomites in mount Seir:
<span class="verse" id="GN36_10">10&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the names of Esau’s sons; <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_11">11&#160;</span> And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_12">12&#160;</span> And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau’s son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Adah Esau’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_13">13&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the daughter of Zibeon, Esau’s wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_15">15&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>were</span> dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn <span class='add'>son</span> of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz,
<span class="verse" id="GN36_16">16&#160;</span> Duke Korah, duke Gatam, <span class='add'>and</span> duke Amalek: these <span class='add'>are</span> the dukes <span class='add'>that came</span> of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Adah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Reuel Esau’s son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these <span class='add'>are</span> the dukes <span class='add'>that came</span> of Reuel in the land of Edom; these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Bashemath Esau’s wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Aholibamah Esau’s wife; duke Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: these <span class='add'>were</span> the dukes <span class='add'>that came</span> of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_19">19&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Esau, who <span class='add'>is</span> Edom, and these <span class='add'>are</span> their dukes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah,
<span class="verse" id="GN36_21">21&#160;</span> And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these <span class='add'>are</span> the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_22">22&#160;</span> And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan’s sister <span class='add'>was</span> Timna.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_23">23&#160;</span> And the children of Shobal <span class='add'>were</span> these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_24">24&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this <span class='add'>was that</span> Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed the asses of Zibeon his father.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_25">25&#160;</span> And the children of Anah <span class='add'>were</span> these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_26">26&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_27">27&#160;</span> The children of Ezer <span class='add'>are</span> these; Bilhan, and Zaavan, and Akan.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_28">28&#160;</span> The children of Dishan <span class='add'>are</span> these; Uz, and Aran.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_29">29&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the dukes <span class='add'>that came</span> of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah,
<span class="verse" id="GN36_30">30&#160;</span> Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these <span class='add'>are</span> the dukes <span class='add'>that came</span> of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN36_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_32">32&#160;</span> And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city <span class='add'>was</span> Dinhabah.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_33">33&#160;</span> And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_34">34&#160;</span> And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_35">35&#160;</span> And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city <span class='add'>was</span> Avith.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_36">36&#160;</span> And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_37">37&#160;</span> And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth <span class='add'>by</span> the river reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_38">38&#160;</span> And Saul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_39">39&#160;</span> And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city <span class='add'>was</span> Pau; and his wife’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
<span class="verse" id="GN36_40">40&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the dukes <span class='add'>that came</span> of Esau, according to their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth,
<span class="verse" id="GN36_41">41&#160;</span> Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
<span class="verse" id="GN36_42">42&#160;</span> Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar,
<span class="verse" id="GN36_43">43&#160;</span> Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these <span class='add'>be</span> the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession: he <span class='add'>is</span> Esau the father of <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the Edomites.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_1">1&#160;</span> And Jacob dwelt in the land <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_2">2&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Jacob. Joseph, <span class='add'>being</span> seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brethren; and the lad <span class='add'>was</span> with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father’s wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_3">3&#160;</span> Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children, because he <span class='add'>was</span> the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of <span class='add'>many</span> <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>colours.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_4">4&#160;</span> And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told <span class='add'>it</span> his brethren: and they hated him yet the more.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed:
<span class="verse" id="GN37_7">7&#160;</span>For, behold, we <span class='add'>were</span> binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_8">8&#160;</span> And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_10">10&#160;</span> And he told <span class='add'>it</span> to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What <span class='add'>is</span> this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
<span class="verse" id="GN37_11">11&#160;</span> And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And his brethren went to feed their father’s flock in Shechem.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_13">13&#160;</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed <span class='add'>the flock</span> in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he said to him, Here <span class='add'>am I</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_14">14&#160;</span> And he said to him, Go, I pray thee, <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And a certain man found him, and, behold, <span class='add'>he was</span> wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou?
<span class="verse" id="GN37_16">16&#160;</span> And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed <span class='add'>their flocks</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_17">17&#160;</span> And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_18">18&#160;</span> And when they saw him afar off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_19">19&#160;</span> And they said one to another, Behold, this <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dreamer cometh.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_20">20&#160;</span> Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shall see what will become of his dreams.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_21">21&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Reuben heard <span class='add'>it</span>, and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kill him.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_22">22&#160;</span> And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, <span class='add'>but</span> cast him into this pit that <span class='add'>is</span> in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, <span class='add'>his</span> coat of <span class='add'>many</span> <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>colours that <span class='add'>was</span> on him;
<span class="verse" id="GN37_24">24&#160;</span> And they took him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit <span class='add'>was</span> empty, <span class='add'>there was</span> no water in it.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_25">25&#160;</span> And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry <span class='add'>it</span> down to Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_26">26&#160;</span> And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit <span class='add'>is it</span> if we slay our brother, and conceal his blood?
<span class="verse" id="GN37_27">27&#160;</span> Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he <span class='add'>is</span> our brother <span class='add'>and</span> our flesh. And his brethren <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were content.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_28">28&#160;</span> Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, <a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph <span class='add'>was</span> not in the pit; and he rent his clothes.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_30">30&#160;</span> And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child <span class='add'>is</span> not; and I, whither shall I go? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN37_31">31&#160;</span> And they took Joseph’s coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and dipped the coat in the blood;
<span class="verse" id="GN37_32">32&#160;</span> And they sent the coat of <span class='add'>many</span> colours, and they brought <span class='add'>it</span> to their father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it <span class='add'>be</span> thy son’s coat or no.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_33">33&#160;</span> And he knew it, and said, <span class='add'>It is</span> my son’s coat; an <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_34">34&#160;</span> And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_35">35&#160;</span> And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.
<span class="verse" id="GN37_36">36&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>officer of Pharaoh’s, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>captain of the guard.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN38_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Hirah.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_2">2&#160;</span> And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_3">3&#160;</span> And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_5">5&#160;</span> And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_6">6&#160;</span> And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Tamar.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> slew him.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_8">8&#160;</span> And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother’s wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_9">9&#160;</span> And Onan knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother’s wife, that he spilled <span class='add'>it</span> on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_10">10&#160;</span> And the thing which he did <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>displeased the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: wherefore he slew him also.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_11">11&#160;</span> Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father’s house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren <span class='add'>did</span>. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN38_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah’s wife died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_13">13&#160;</span> And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his sheep.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_14">14&#160;</span> And she put her widow’s garments off from her, and covered her with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an <a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>open place, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_15">15&#160;</span> When Judah saw her, he thought her <span class='add'>to be</span> an harlot; because she had covered her face.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_16">16&#160;</span> And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she <span class='add'>was</span> his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?
<span class="verse" id="GN38_17">17&#160;</span> And he said, I will send <span class='add'>thee</span> <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give <span class='add'>me</span> a pledge, till thou send <span class='add'>it</span>?
<span class="verse" id="GN38_18">18&#160;</span> And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine hand. And he gave <span class='add'>it</span> her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_19">19&#160;</span> And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_20">20&#160;</span> And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive <span class='add'>his</span> pledge from the woman’s hand: but he found her not.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_21">21&#160;</span> Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the harlot, that <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this <span class='add'>place</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_22">22&#160;</span> And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her; and also the men of the place said, <span class='add'>that</span> there was no harlot in this <span class='add'>place</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_23">23&#160;</span> And Judah said, Let her take <span class='add'>it</span> to her, lest we <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN38_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she <span class='add'>is</span> with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_25">25&#160;</span>When she <span class='add'>was</span> brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose these <span class='add'>are, am</span> I with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose <span class='add'>are</span> these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_26">26&#160;</span> And Judah acknowledged <span class='add'>them</span>, and said, She hath been more righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN38_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins <span class='add'>were</span> in her womb.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_28">28&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when she travailed, that <span class='add'>the one</span> put out <span class='add'>his</span> hand: and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_29">29&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, <a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>How hast thou broken forth? <span class='add'>this</span> breach <span class='add'>be</span> upon thee: therefore his name was called <a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pharez.
<span class="verse" id="GN38_30">30&#160;</span> And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was called Zarah.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN39_1">1&#160;</span> And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the <a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_3">3&#160;</span> And his master saw that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> with him, and that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_4">4&#160;</span> And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all <span class='add'>that</span> he had he put into his hand.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_5">5&#160;</span> And it came to pass from the time <span class='add'>that</span> he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed the Egyptian’s house for Joseph’s sake; and the blessing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was upon all that he had in the house, and in the field.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_6">6&#160;</span> And he left all that he had in Joseph’s hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was <span class='add'>a</span> goodly <span class='add'>person</span>, and well favoured. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN39_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after these things, that his master’s wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_8">8&#160;</span> But he refused, and said unto his master’s wife, Behold, my master wotteth not what <span class='add'>is</span> with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he hath to my hand;
<span class="verse" id="GN39_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou <span class='add'>art</span> his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
<span class="verse" id="GN39_10">10&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, <span class='add'>or</span> to be with her.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass about this time, that <span class='add'>Joseph</span> went into the house to do his business; and <span class='add'>there was</span> none of the men of the house there within.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_12">12&#160;</span> And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN39_13">13&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,
<span class="verse" id="GN39_14">14&#160;</span> That she called unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>loud voice:
<span class="verse" id="GN39_15">15&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_16">16&#160;</span> And she laid up his garment by her, until <a href='#FN408' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>his lord came home.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_17">17&#160;</span> And she spake unto him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me:
<span class="verse" id="GN39_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN39_19">19&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_20">20&#160;</span> And Joseph’s master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king’s prisoners <span class='add'>were</span> bound: and he was there in the prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN39_21">21&#160;</span>¶ But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with Joseph, and <a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_22">22&#160;</span> And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph’s hand all the prisoners that <span class='add'>were</span> in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer <span class='add'>of it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN39_23">23&#160;</span> The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing <span class='add'>that was</span> under his hand; because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with him, and <span class='add'>that</span> which he did, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made <span class='add'>it</span> to prosper.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN40_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after these things, <span class='add'>that</span> the butler of the king of Egypt and <span class='add'>his</span> baker had offended their lord the king of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_2">2&#160;</span> And Pharaoh was wroth against two <span class='add'>of</span> his officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_3">3&#160;</span> And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph <span class='add'>was</span> bound.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_4">4&#160;</span> And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN40_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which <span class='add'>were</span> bound in the prison.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_6">6&#160;</span> And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked upon them, and, behold, they <span class='add'>were</span> sad.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_7">7&#160;</span> And he asked Pharaoh’s officers that <span class='add'>were</span> with him in the ward of his lord’s house, saying, Wherefore <a href='#FN410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>look ye <span class='add'>so</span> sadly to day?
<span class="verse" id="GN40_8">8&#160;</span> And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, <span class='add'>Do</span> not interpretations <span class='add'>belong</span> to God? tell me <span class='add'>them</span>, I pray you.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_9">9&#160;</span> And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine <span class='add'>was</span> before me;
<span class="verse" id="GN40_10">10&#160;</span> And in the vine <span class='add'>were</span> three branches: and it <span class='add'>was</span> as though it budded, <span class='add'>and</span> her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes:
<span class="verse" id="GN40_11">11&#160;</span> And Pharaoh’s cup <span class='add'>was</span> in my hand: and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh’s cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_12">12&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto him, This <span class='add'>is</span> the interpretation of it: The three branches <span class='add'>are</span> three days:
<span class="verse" id="GN40_13">13&#160;</span> Yet within three days shall Pharaoh <a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lift up thine head, and restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh’s cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_14">14&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN412' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house:
<span class="verse" id="GN40_15">15&#160;</span> For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_16">16&#160;</span> When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also <span class='add'>was</span> in my dream, and, behold, <span class='add'>I had</span> three <a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>white baskets on my head:
<span class="verse" id="GN40_17">17&#160;</span> And in the uppermost basket <span class='add'>there was</span> of all manner <a href='#FN414' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_18">18&#160;</span> And Joseph answered and said, This <span class='add'>is</span> the interpretation thereof: The three baskets <span class='add'>are</span> three days:
<span class="verse" id="GN40_19">19&#160;</span> Yet within three days shall Pharaoh <a href='#FN415' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree; and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN40_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass the third day, <span class='add'>which was</span> Pharaoh’s birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he <a href='#FN416' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_21">21&#160;</span> And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh’s hand:
<span class="verse" id="GN40_22">22&#160;</span> But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them.
<span class="verse" id="GN40_23">23&#160;</span> Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_2">2&#160;</span> And, behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_3">3&#160;</span> And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed; and stood by the <span class='add'>other</span> kine upon the brink of the river.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_4">4&#160;</span> And the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_5">5&#160;</span> And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, <a href='#FN417' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rank and good.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_6">6&#160;</span> And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_7">7&#160;</span> And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, <span class='add'>it was</span> a dream.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but <span class='add'>there was</span> none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_10">10&#160;</span> Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard’s house, <span class='add'>both</span> me and the chief baker:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_11">11&#160;</span> And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_12">12&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he <a href='#FN418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did interpret.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_13">13&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN419' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they <a href='#FN420' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved <span class='add'>himself</span>, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_15">15&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thee, <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN421' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thou canst understand a dream to interpret it.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_16">16&#160;</span> And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, <span class='add'>It is</span> not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_17">17&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of the river:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_18">18&#160;</span> And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_19">19&#160;</span> And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_20">20&#160;</span> And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_21">21&#160;</span> And when they had <a href='#FN422' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they <span class='add'>were</span> still ill favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_22">22&#160;</span> And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_23">23&#160;</span> And, behold, seven ears, <a href='#FN423' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>withered, thin, <span class='add'>and</span> blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_24">24&#160;</span> And the thin ears devoured the seven good ears: and I told <span class='add'>this</span> unto the magicians; but <span class='add'>there was</span> none that could declare <span class='add'>it</span> to me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh <span class='add'>is</span> one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he <span class='add'>is</span> about to do.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_26">26&#160;</span> The seven good kine <span class='add'>are</span> seven years; and the seven good ears <span class='add'>are</span> seven years: the dream <span class='add'>is</span> one.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_27">27&#160;</span> And the seven thin and ill favoured kine that came up after them <span class='add'>are</span> seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_28">28&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God <span class='add'>is</span> about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_29">29&#160;</span> Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="GN41_30">30&#160;</span> And there shall arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;
<span class="verse" id="GN41_31">31&#160;</span> And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that famine following; for it <span class='add'>shall be</span> very <a href='#FN424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grievous.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_32">32&#160;</span> And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; <span class='add'>it is</span> because the thing <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN425' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_33">33&#160;</span> Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_34">34&#160;</span> Let Pharaoh do <span class='add'>this</span>, and let him appoint <a href='#FN426' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_35">35&#160;</span> And let them gather all the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_36">36&#160;</span> And that food shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land <a href='#FN427' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>perish not through the famine.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_37">37&#160;</span>¶ And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_38">38&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find <span class='add'>such a one</span> as this <span class='add'>is</span>, a man in whom the Spirit of God <span class='add'>is</span>?
<span class="verse" id="GN41_39">39&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thee all this, <span class='add'>there is</span> none so discreet and wise as thou <span class='add'>art:</span>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_40">40&#160;</span><a href='#FN428' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be <a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_41">41&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_42">42&#160;</span> And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph’s hand, and arrayed him in vestures of <a href='#FN430' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck;
<span class="verse" id="GN41_43">43&#160;</span> And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, <a href='#FN431' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN432' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Bow the knee: and he made him <span class='add'>ruler</span> over all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_44">44&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I <span class='add'>am</span> Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_45">45&#160;</span> And Pharaoh called Joseph’s name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah <a href='#FN433' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>priest of On. And Joseph went out over <span class='add'>all</span> the land of Egypt.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_46">46&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph <span class='add'>was</span> thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_47">47&#160;</span> And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_48">48&#160;</span> And he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field, which <span class='add'>was</span> round about every city, laid he up in the same.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_49">49&#160;</span> And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for <span class='add'>it was</span> without number.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_50">50&#160;</span><a href='#FN434' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah <a href='#FN435' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>priest of On bare unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_51">51&#160;</span> And Joseph called the name of the firstborn <a href='#FN436' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Manasseh: For God, <span class='add'>said he</span>, hath made me forget all my toil, and all my father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_52">52&#160;</span> And the name of the second called he <a href='#FN437' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN41_53">53&#160;</span>¶ And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the seven years of dearth began to come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands; but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_55">55&#160;</span> And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_56">56&#160;</span> And the famine was over all the face of the earth: and Joseph opened <a href='#FN439' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN41_57">57&#160;</span> And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy <span class='add'>corn;</span> because that the famine was <span class='add'>so</span> sore in all lands.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_1">1&#160;</span> Now when <a href='#FN440' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?
<span class="verse" id="GN42_2">2&#160;</span> And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph’s ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_4">4&#160;</span> But Benjamin, Joseph’s brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_5">5&#160;</span> And the sons of Israel came to buy <span class='add'>corn</span> among those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_6">6&#160;</span> And Joseph <span class='add'>was</span> the governor over the land, <span class='add'>and</span> he <span class='add'>it was</span> that sold to all the people of the land: and Joseph’s brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him <span class='add'>with</span> their faces to the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_7">7&#160;</span> And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake <a href='#FN441' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_8">8&#160;</span> And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_9">9&#160;</span> And Joseph <a href='#FN442' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> spies; to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_10">10&#160;</span> And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_11">11&#160;</span> We <span class='add'>are</span> all one man’s sons; we <span class='add'>are</span> true <span class='add'>men</span>, thy servants are no spies.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_12">12&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of the land ye are come.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_13">13&#160;</span> And they said, Thy servants <span class='add'>are</span> twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the youngest <span class='add'>is</span> this day with our father, and one <span class='add'>is</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_14">14&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto them, That <span class='add'>is it</span> that I spake unto you, saying, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> spies:
<span class="verse" id="GN42_15">15&#160;</span> Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_16">16&#160;</span> Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall be <a href='#FN443' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether <span class='add'>there be any</span> truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye <span class='add'>are</span> spies.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_17">17&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN444' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>put them all together into ward three days.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_18">18&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; <span class='add'>for</span> I fear God:
<span class="verse" id="GN42_19">19&#160;</span>If ye <span class='add'>be</span> true <span class='add'>men</span>, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for the famine of your houses:
<span class="verse" id="GN42_20">20&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN445' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bring your youngest brother unto me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And they said one to another, We <span class='add'>are</span> verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon us.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_22">22&#160;</span> And Reuben answered them, saying, <a href='#FN446' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blood is required.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_23">23&#160;</span> And they knew not that Joseph understood <span class='add'>them;</span> for <a href='#FN447' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he spake unto them by an interpreter.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_24">24&#160;</span> And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore every man’s money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_26">26&#160;</span> And they laded their asses with the corn, and departed thence.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_27">27&#160;</span> And as one of them opened his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money; for, behold, it <span class='add'>was</span> in his sack’s mouth.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_28">28&#160;</span> And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, <span class='add'>it is</span> even in my sack: and their heart <a href='#FN448' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>failed <span class='add'>them</span>, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> God hath done unto us?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN42_30">30&#160;</span> The man, <span class='add'>who is</span> the lord of the land, spake <a href='#FN449' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>roughly to us, and took us for spies of the country.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_31">31&#160;</span> And we said unto him, We <span class='add'>are</span> true <span class='add'>men;</span> we are no spies:
<span class="verse" id="GN42_32">32&#160;</span>We <span class='add'>be</span> twelve brethren, sons of our father; one <span class='add'>is</span> not, and the youngest <span class='add'>is</span> this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_33">33&#160;</span> And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye <span class='add'>are</span> true <span class='add'>men;</span> leave one of your brethren <span class='add'>here</span> with me, and take <span class='add'>food for</span> the famine of your households, and be gone:
<span class="verse" id="GN42_34">34&#160;</span> And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shall I know that ye <span class='add'>are</span> no spies, but <span class='add'>that</span> ye <span class='add'>are</span> true <span class='add'>men: so</span> will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN42_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man’s bundle of money <span class='add'>was</span> in his sack: and when <span class='add'>both</span> they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_36">36&#160;</span> And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved <span class='add'>of my children:</span> Joseph <span class='add'>is</span> not, and Simeon <span class='add'>is</span> not, and ye will take Benjamin <span class='add'>away:</span> all these things are against me.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_37">37&#160;</span> And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
<span class="verse" id="GN42_38">38&#160;</span> And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN43_0'> 43</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN43_1">1&#160;</span> And the famine <span class='add'>was</span> sore in the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_3">3&#160;</span> And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man <a href='#FN450' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your <a href='#FN451' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>brother <span class='add'>be</span> with you.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_4">4&#160;</span> If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down and buy thee food:
<span class="verse" id="GN43_5">5&#160;</span> But if thou wilt not send <span class='add'>him</span>, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother <span class='add'>be</span> with you.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_6">6&#160;</span> And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye <span class='add'>so</span> ill with me, <span class='add'>as</span> to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
<span class="verse" id="GN43_7">7&#160;</span> And they said, The man <a href='#FN452' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, <span class='add'>Is</span> your father yet alive? have ye <span class='add'>another</span> brother? and we told him according to the <a href='#FN453' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tenor of these words: <a href='#FN454' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
<span class="verse" id="GN43_8">8&#160;</span> And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, <span class='add'>and</span> also our little ones.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_9">9&#160;</span> I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: <a href='#FN455' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever:
<span class="verse" id="GN43_10">10&#160;</span> For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned <a href='#FN456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>this second time.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN43_11">11&#160;</span> And their father Israel said unto them, If <span class='add'>it must be</span> so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh, nuts, and almonds:
<span class="verse" id="GN43_12">12&#160;</span> And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry <span class='add'>it</span> again in your hand; peradventure it <span class='add'>was</span> an oversight:
<span class="verse" id="GN43_13">13&#160;</span> Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man:
<span class="verse" id="GN43_14">14&#160;</span> And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. <a href='#FN457' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>If I be bereaved <span class='add'>of my children</span>, I am bereaved.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN43_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_16">16&#160;</span> And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring <span class='add'>these</span> men home, and <a href='#FN458' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>slay, and make ready; for <span class='add'>these</span> men shall <a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dine with me at noon.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_17">17&#160;</span> And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph’s house.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_18">18&#160;</span> And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph’s house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may <a href='#FN460' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our asses.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_19">19&#160;</span> And they came near to the steward of Joseph’s house, and they communed with him at the door of the house,
<span class="verse" id="GN43_20">20&#160;</span> And said, O sir, <a href='#FN461' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN462' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>we came indeed down at the first time to buy food:
<span class="verse" id="GN43_21">21&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, <span class='add'>every</span> man’s money <span class='add'>was</span> in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_22">22&#160;</span> And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_23">23&#160;</span> And he said, Peace <span class='add'>be</span> to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: <a href='#FN463' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_24">24&#160;</span> And the man brought the men into Joseph’s house, and <a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gave <span class='add'>them</span> water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses provender.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_25">25&#160;</span> And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN43_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which <span class='add'>was</span> in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_27">27&#160;</span> And he asked them of <span class='add'>their</span> <a href='#FN465' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>welfare, and said, <a href='#FN466' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>Is</span> your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? <span class='add'>Is</span> he yet alive?
<span class="verse" id="GN43_28">28&#160;</span> And they answered, Thy servant our father <span class='add'>is</span> in good health, he <span class='add'>is</span> yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_29">29&#160;</span> And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother’s son, and said, <span class='add'>Is</span> this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_30">30&#160;</span> And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought <span class='add'>where</span> to weep; and he entered into <span class='add'>his</span> chamber, and wept there.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_31">31&#160;</span> And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_32">32&#160;</span> And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination unto the Egyptians.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_33">33&#160;</span> And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men marvelled one at another.
<span class="verse" id="GN43_34">34&#160;</span> And he took <span class='add'>and sent</span> messes unto them from before him: but Benjamin’s mess was five times so much as any of theirs. And they drank, and <a href='#FN467' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were merry with him.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN44_0'> 44</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN44_1">1&#160;</span> And he commanded <a href='#FN468' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men’s sacks <span class='add'>with</span> food, as much as they can carry, and put every man’s money in his sack’s mouth.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_2">2&#160;</span> And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack’s mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_3">3&#160;</span> As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> when they were gone out of the city, <span class='add'>and</span> not <span class='add'>yet</span> far off, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good?
<span class="verse" id="GN44_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not this <span class='add'>it</span> in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indeed he <a href='#FN469' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN44_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same words.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_7">7&#160;</span> And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing:
<span class="verse" id="GN44_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks’ mouths, we brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of thy lord’s house silver or gold?
<span class="verse" id="GN44_9">9&#160;</span> With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my lord’s bondmen.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, Now also <span class='add'>let</span> it <span class='add'>be</span> according unto your words: he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye shall be blameless.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_11">11&#160;</span> Then they speedily took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_12">12&#160;</span> And he searched, <span class='add'>and</span> began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin’s sack.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_13">13&#160;</span> Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN44_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph’s house; for he <span class='add'>was</span> yet there: and they fell before him on the ground.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_15">15&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto them, What deed <span class='add'>is</span> this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly <a href='#FN470' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>divine?
<span class="verse" id="GN44_16">16&#160;</span> And Judah said, What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> my lord’s servants, both we, and <span class='add'>he</span> also with whom the cup is found.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_17">17&#160;</span> And he said, God forbid that I should do so: <span class='add'>but</span> the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN44_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord’s ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou <span class='add'>art</span> even as Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_19">19&#160;</span> My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?
<span class="verse" id="GN44_20">20&#160;</span> And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_21">21&#160;</span> And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_22">22&#160;</span> And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot leave his father: for <span class='add'>if</span> he should leave his father, <span class='add'>his father</span> would die.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_23">23&#160;</span> And thou saidst unto thy servants, <a href='#FN471' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_24">24&#160;</span> And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_25">25&#160;</span> And our father said, Go again, <span class='add'>and</span> buy us a little food.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_26">26&#160;</span> And we said, We cannot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we may not see the man’s face, except our youngest brother <span class='add'>be</span> with us.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_27">27&#160;</span> And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two <span class='add'>sons:</span>
<span class="verse" id="GN44_28">28&#160;</span> And the one went out from me, and I said, <a href='#FN472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since:
<span class="verse" id="GN44_29">29&#160;</span> And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_30">30&#160;</span> Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad <span class='add'>be</span> not with us; seeing that his life is bound up in the lad’s life;
<span class="verse" id="GN44_31">31&#160;</span> It shall come to pass, when he seeth that the lad <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>with us</span>, that he will die: and thy servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to the grave.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_32">32&#160;</span> For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, <a href='#FN473' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_33">33&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="GN44_34">34&#160;</span> For how shall I go up to my father, and the lad <span class='add'>be</span> not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall <a href='#FN474' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>come on my father.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN45_0'> 45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN45_1">1&#160;</span> Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_2">2&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN475' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_3">3&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, <a href='#FN476' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were <a href='#FN477' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>troubled at his presence.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_4">4&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span> Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_5">5&#160;</span> Now therefore be not grieved, <a href='#FN478' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: <a href='#FN479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for God did send me before you to preserve life.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_6">6&#160;</span> For these two years <span class='add'>hath</span> the famine <span class='add'>been</span> in the land: and yet <span class='add'>there are</span> five years, in the which <span class='add'>there shall</span> neither <span class='add'>be</span> earing nor harvest.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_7">7&#160;</span> And God sent me before you <a href='#FN480' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_8">8&#160;</span>So now <span class='add'>it was</span> not you <span class='add'>that</span> sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_9">9&#160;</span> Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not:
<span class="verse" id="GN45_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children’s children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou hast:
<span class="verse" id="GN45_11">11&#160;</span> And there will I nourish thee; for yet <span class='add'>there are</span> five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and all that thou hast, come to poverty.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_12">12&#160;</span> And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that <span class='add'>it is</span> my mouth that speaketh unto you.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_13">13&#160;</span> And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_14">14&#160;</span> And he fell upon his brother Benjamin’s neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_15">15&#160;</span> Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN45_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh’s house, saying, Joseph’s brethren are come: and it <a href='#FN481' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_17">17&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;
<span class="verse" id="GN45_18">18&#160;</span> And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_19">19&#160;</span> Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_20">20&#160;</span> Also <a href='#FN482' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>regard not your stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt <span class='add'>is</span> yours.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_21">21&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, according to the <a href='#FN483' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_22">22&#160;</span> To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver, and five changes of raiment.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_23">23&#160;</span> And to his father he sent after this <span class='add'>manner;</span> ten asses <a href='#FN484' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_24">24&#160;</span> So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that ye fall not out by the way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN45_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father,
<span class="verse" id="GN45_26">26&#160;</span> And told him, saying, Joseph <span class='add'>is</span> yet alive, and he <span class='add'>is</span> governor over all the land of Egypt. And <a href='#FN485' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Jacob’s heart fainted, for he believed them not.
<span class="verse" id="GN45_27">27&#160;</span> And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived:
<span class="verse" id="GN45_28">28&#160;</span> And Israel said, <span class='add'>It is</span> enough; Joseph my son <span class='add'>is</span> yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN46_0'> 46</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_1">1&#160;</span> And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_2">2&#160;</span> And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here <span class='add'>am</span> I.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_3">3&#160;</span> And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span> God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there make of thee a great nation:
<span class="verse" id="GN46_4">4&#160;</span> I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up <span class='add'>again:</span> and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_5">5&#160;</span> And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba: and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_6">6&#160;</span> And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, <a href='#FN486' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jacob, and all his seed with him:
<span class="verse" id="GN46_7">7&#160;</span> His sons, and his sons’ sons with him, his daughters, and his sons’ daughters, and all his seed brought he with him into Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN487' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: <a href='#FN488' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Reuben, Jacob’s firstborn.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_9">9&#160;</span> And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN489' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of <a href='#FN490' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of <a href='#FN491' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zerah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_15">15&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>be</span> the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padan-aram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his daughters <span class='add'>were</span> thirty and three. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN493' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_18">18&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, <span class='add'>even</span> sixteen souls.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_19">19&#160;</span> The sons of Rachel Jacob’s wife; Joseph, and Benjamin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, <a href='#FN494' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah <a href='#FN495' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>priest of On bare unto him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_21">21&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN496' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And the sons of Benjamin <span class='add'>were</span> Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_22">22&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls <span class='add'>were</span> fourteen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Dan; Hushim.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_25">25&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls <span class='add'>were</span> seven.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN497' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his <a href='#FN498' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>loins, besides Jacob’s sons’ wives, all the souls <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and six;
<span class="verse" id="GN46_27">27&#160;</span> And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, <span class='add'>were</span> two souls: all the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and ten. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN46_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_29">29&#160;</span> And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_30">30&#160;</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou <span class='add'>art</span> yet alive.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_31">31&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father’s house, I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father’s house, which <span class='add'>were</span> in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;
<span class="verse" id="GN46_32">32&#160;</span> And the men <span class='add'>are</span> shepherds, for <a href='#FN499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their trade hath been to feed cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
<span class="verse" id="GN46_33">33&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What <span class='add'>is</span> your occupation?
<span class="verse" id="GN46_34">34&#160;</span> That ye shall say, Thy servants’ trade hath been about cattle from our youth even until now, both we, <span class='add'>and</span> also our fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination unto the Egyptians.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN47_0'> 47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN47_1">1&#160;</span> Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> in the land of Goshen.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_2">2&#160;</span> And he took some of his brethren, <span class='add'>even</span> five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_3">3&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What <span class='add'>is</span> your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants <span class='add'>are</span> shepherds, both we, <span class='add'>and</span> also our fathers.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_4">4&#160;</span> They said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine <span class='add'>is</span> sore in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_5">5&#160;</span> And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee:
<span class="verse" id="GN47_6">6&#160;</span> The land of Egypt <span class='add'>is</span> before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou knowest <a href='#FN500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><span class='add'>any</span> men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_7">7&#160;</span> And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_8">8&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, <a href='#FN501' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>How old <span class='add'>art</span> thou?
<span class="verse" id="GN47_9">9&#160;</span> And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, <a href='#FN502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The days of the years of my pilgrimage <span class='add'>are</span> an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_10">10&#160;</span> And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN47_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_12">12&#160;</span> And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and all his father’s household, with bread, <a href='#FN503' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN504' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>according to <span class='add'>their</span> families.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN47_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>there was</span> no bread in all the land; for the famine <span class='add'>was</span> very sore, so that the land of Egypt and <span class='add'>all</span> the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_14">14&#160;</span> And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh’s house.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_15">15&#160;</span> And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_16">16&#160;</span> And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will give you for your cattle, if money fail.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_17">17&#160;</span> And they brought their cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread <span class='add'>in exchange</span> for horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for the asses: and he <a href='#FN505' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fed them with bread for all their cattle for that year.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_18">18&#160;</span> When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We will not hide <span class='add'>it</span> from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also <a href='#FN506' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>hath our herds of cattle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
<span class="verse" id="GN47_19">19&#160;</span> Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants unto Pharaoh: and give <span class='add'>us</span> seed, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_20">20&#160;</span> And Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh’s.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_21">21&#160;</span> And as for the people, he removed them to cities from <span class='add'>one</span> end of the borders of Egypt even to the <span class='add'>other</span> end thereof.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_22">22&#160;</span> Only the land of the <a href='#FN507' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion <span class='add'>assigned them</span> of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_23">23&#160;</span> Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, <span class='add'>here is</span> seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_24">24&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth <span class='add'>part</span> unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for your little ones.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_25">25&#160;</span> And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh’s servants.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_26">26&#160;</span> And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, <span class='add'>that</span> Pharaoh should have the fifth <span class='add'>part;</span> except the land of the <a href='#FN508' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>priests only, <span class='add'>which</span> became not Pharaoh’s.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN47_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied exceedingly.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_28">28&#160;</span> And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years: so <a href='#FN509' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_29">29&#160;</span> And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, <a href='#FN510' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="GN47_30">30&#160;</span> But I will lie with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said.
<span class="verse" id="GN47_31">31&#160;</span> And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And <a href='#FN511' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Israel bowed himself upon the bed’s head.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN48_0'> 48</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN48_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after these things, that <span class='add'>one</span> told Joseph, Behold, thy father <span class='add'>is</span> sick: and he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_2">2&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_3">3&#160;</span> And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty appeared unto me at <a href='#FN512' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
<span class="verse" id="GN48_4">4&#160;</span> And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will give this land to thy seed after thee <span class='add'>for</span> an everlasting possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN48_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And now thy <a href='#FN513' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt, <span class='add'>are</span> mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_6">6&#160;</span> And thy issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, <span class='add'>and</span> shall be called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_7">7&#160;</span> And as for me, when I came from Padan, <a href='#FN514' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan in the way, when yet <span class='add'>there was</span> but a little way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same <span class='add'>is</span> Beth-lehem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN48_8">8&#160;</span> And Israel beheld Joseph’s sons, and said, Who <span class='add'>are</span> these?
<span class="verse" id="GN48_9">9&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto his father, They <span class='add'>are</span> my sons, whom God hath given me in this <span class='add'>place</span>. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, unto me, and I will bless them.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_10">10&#160;</span> Now the eyes of Israel were <a href='#FN515' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dim for age, <span class='add'>so that</span> he could not see. And he brought them near unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_11">11&#160;</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy seed.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_12">12&#160;</span> And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_13">13&#160;</span> And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel’s left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel’s right hand, and brought <span class='add'>them</span> near unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_14">14&#160;</span> And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> upon Ephraim’s head, who <span class='add'>was</span> the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh’s head, guiding his hands wittingly; for Manasseh <span class='add'>was</span> the firstborn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN48_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN516' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto this day,
<span class="verse" id="GN48_16">16&#160;</span> The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac; and let them <a href='#FN517' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_17">17&#160;</span> And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father’s hand, to remove it from Ephraim’s head unto Manasseh’s head.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_18">18&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this <span class='add'>is</span> the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_19">19&#160;</span> And his father refused, and said, I know <span class='add'>it</span>, my son, I know <span class='add'>it:</span> he also shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a <a href='#FN518' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>multitude of nations.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_20">20&#160;</span> And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_21">21&#160;</span> And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="GN48_22">22&#160;</span> Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN49_0'> 49</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_1">1&#160;</span> And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may tell you <span class='add'>that</span> which shall befall you in the last days.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_2">2&#160;</span> Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Reuben, thou <span class='add'>art</span> my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:
<span class="verse" id="GN49_4">4&#160;</span> Unstable as water, <a href='#FN519' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou shalt not excel; because thou <a href='#FN520' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wentest up to thy father’s bed; then defiledst thou <span class='add'>it:</span> <a href='#FN521' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he went up to my couch.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Simeon and Levi <span class='add'>are</span> brethren; <a href='#FN522' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>instruments of cruelty <span class='add'>are in</span> their habitations.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_6">6&#160;</span> O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they <a href='#FN523' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>digged down a wall.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_7">7&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> their anger, for <span class='add'>it was</span> fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Judah, thou <span class='add'>art he</span> whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the neck of thine enemies; thy father’s children shall bow down before thee.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_9">9&#160;</span> Judah <span class='add'>is</span> a lion’s whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shall rouse him up?
<span class="verse" id="GN49_10">10&#160;</span> The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him <span class='add'>shall</span> the gathering of the people <span class='add'>be</span>.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_11">11&#160;</span> Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass’s colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes:
<span class="verse" id="GN49_12">12&#160;</span> His eyes <span class='add'>shall be</span> red with wine, and his teeth white with milk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he <span class='add'>shall be</span> for an haven of ships; and his border <span class='add'>shall be</span> unto Zidon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Issachar <span class='add'>is</span> a strong ass couching down between two burdens:
<span class="verse" id="GN49_15">15&#160;</span> And he saw that rest <span class='add'>was</span> good, and the land that <span class='add'>it was</span> pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_17">17&#160;</span> Dan shall be a serpent by the way, <a href='#FN524' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_18">18&#160;</span> I have waited for thy salvation, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Out of Asher his bread <span class='add'>shall be</span> fat, and he shall yield royal dainties. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Naphtali <span class='add'>is</span> a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Joseph <span class='add'>is</span> a fruitful bough, <span class='add'>even</span> a fruitful bough by a well; <span class='add'>whose</span> <a href='#FN525' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>branches run over the wall:
<span class="verse" id="GN49_23">23&#160;</span> The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot <span class='add'>at him</span>, and hated him:
<span class="verse" id="GN49_24">24&#160;</span> But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty <span class='add'>God</span> of Jacob; (from thence <span class='add'>is</span> the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)
<span class="verse" id="GN49_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:
<span class="verse" id="GN49_26">26&#160;</span> The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Benjamin shall ravin <span class='add'>as</span> a wolf: in the morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN49_28">28&#160;</span>¶ All these <span class='add'>are</span> the twelve tribes of Israel: and this <span class='add'>is it</span> that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one according to his blessing he blessed them.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_29">29&#160;</span> And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: <a href='#FN526' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bury me with my fathers in the cave that <span class='add'>is</span> in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
<span class="verse" id="GN49_30">30&#160;</span> In the cave that <span class='add'>is</span> in the field of Machpelah, which <span class='add'>is</span> before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, <a href='#FN527' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_31">31&#160;</span> There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_32">32&#160;</span> The purchase of the field and of the cave that <span class='add'>is</span> therein <span class='add'>was</span> from the children of Heth.
<span class="verse" id="GN49_33">33&#160;</span> And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='GN50_0'> 50</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN50_1">1&#160;</span> And Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_2">2&#160;</span> And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_3">3&#160;</span> And forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians <a href='#FN528' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mourned for him threescore and ten days.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_4">4&#160;</span> And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN50_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN529' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_6">6&#160;</span> And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN50_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
<span class="verse" id="GN50_8">8&#160;</span> And all the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father’s house: only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_9">9&#160;</span> And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_10">10&#160;</span> And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad, which <span class='add'>is</span> beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_11">11&#160;</span> And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This <span class='add'>is</span> a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called <a href='#FN530' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Abel-mizraim, which <span class='add'>is</span> beyond Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_12">12&#160;</span> And his sons did unto him according as he commanded them:
<span class="verse" id="GN50_13">13&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN531' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham <a href='#FN532' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN50_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN50_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And when Joseph’s brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_16">16&#160;</span> And they <a href='#FN533' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,
<span class="verse" id="GN50_17">17&#160;</span> So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_18">18&#160;</span> And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we <span class='add'>be</span> thy servants.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_19">19&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto them, <a href='#FN534' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Fear not: for <span class='add'>am</span> I in the place of God?
<span class="verse" id="GN50_20">20&#160;</span> But as for you, ye thought evil against me; <span class='add'>but</span> God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day, to save much people alive.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_21">21&#160;</span> Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake <a href='#FN535' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>kindly unto them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="GN50_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father’s house: and Joseph lived an hundred and ten years.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_23">23&#160;</span> And Joseph saw Ephraim’s children of the third <span class='add'>generation:</span> <a href='#FN536' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the children also of Machir the son of Manasseh were <a href='#FN537' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>brought up upon Joseph’s knees.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_24">24&#160;</span> And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and <a href='#FN538' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_25">25&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN539' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.
<span class="verse" id="GN50_26">26&#160;</span> So Joseph died, <span class='add'>being</span> an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_6'>33. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS136_5'>136. 5</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_15'>14. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC17_24'>17. 24</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_3'>11. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C24_6'>4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. between the light and between the darkness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. And the evening was, and the morning was, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS136_5'>136. 5</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_12'>10. 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_15'>51. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. expansion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_15'>51. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_7'>33. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS136_6'>136. 6</a>. Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_8'>38. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. tender grass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_19'>4. 19</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS136_7'>136. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. between the day and between the night.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the rule of the day, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_35'>31. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Esd. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_47'>6. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, creeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. face of the firmament of heaven.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_17'>8. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_1'>9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_1'>5. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_6'>9. 6</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_7'>11. 7</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP4_24'>4. 24</a>. Col. <a href='COL.xhtml#CL3_10'>3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_4'>19. 4</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_1'>9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb creepeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. seeding seed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_3'>9. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a living soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN1_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_16'>39. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_11'>20. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_17'>31. 17</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_14'>5. 14</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_4'>4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. created to make.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a mist which went up from, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. dust of the ground.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_47'>15. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_45'>15. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_25'>24. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Cush.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, eastward to Assyria.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Adam.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eating thou shalt eat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. dying thou shalt die.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_24'>36. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb as before him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. called.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. builded.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_8'>11. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN2_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_5'>19. 5</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_7'>10. 7</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C16_16'>6. 16</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_31'>5. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Yea, because, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C211_3'>11. 3</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T12_14'>2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_24'>25. 24</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T12_14'>2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, things to gird about.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wind.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, subject to thy husband.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C114_34'>14. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb cause to bud.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN3_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Chavah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Hebel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a feeder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the end of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sheep, or, goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_4'>11. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, have the excellency?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, subject unto thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_3'>10. 3</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_35'>23. 35</a>. 1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN3_12'>3. 12</a>. Jude <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, My iniquity is greater than that it may be forgiven</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Chanoch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb Lemech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. whetter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I would slay a man in my wound, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in my hurt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Sheth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Enosh</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN4_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to call themselves by the name of the <span class="csc">Lord</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_1'>1. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Enosh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Kenan.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. Maleleel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Jered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. Mathusala.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_16'>44. 16</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_5'>11. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Lemech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN5_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. Noe.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the whole imagination. The Hebrew word signifieth not only the imagination, but also the purposes and desires.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_21'>8. 21</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_19'>15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. every day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from man unto beast.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_17'>44. 17</a>. 2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_5'>2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upright.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from the earth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. nests.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN6_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_7'>11 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Pet <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_5'>2. 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. seven seven.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb blot out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, on the seventh day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, floodgates.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_4'>10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the breath of the spirit of life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN7_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_4'>10 4</a>. 2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_5'>2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in going and returning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb were in going and decreasing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in going forth and returning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. caused her to come.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 one]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. families.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a savour of rest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_5'>6. 5</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_19'>15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN8_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. As yet all the days of the earth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_28'>1. 28</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_17'>8. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_29'>1. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV17_14'>17. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_52'>26. 52</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV13_10'>13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>1. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_9'>54. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus 43. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_11'>11</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Chenaan.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, servant to them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN9_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, persuade.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_5'>1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. Babylon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he went out into Assyria.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the streets of the city.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Tzidon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Azzah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Arpachshad.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Shelah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN10_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.25</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_19'>1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_5'>10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man said to his neighbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. burn them to a burning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Confusion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_19'>1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_35'>3. 35</a>, Phalec.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_35'>3. 35</a>, Saruch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_34'>3 34</a>, Thara.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_2'>24 2</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_26'>1. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN11_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_7'>9. 7</a>. Judith <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_7'>5. 7</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_4'>7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN12_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_3'>7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_18'>18. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_18'>22. 18</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_25'>3. 25</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_8'>3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_15'>13. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_4'>13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN12_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in going and journeying.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN13_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN13_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men brethren.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN13_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_4'>26. 4</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_4'>34. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN13_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. plains.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the plain of Kiriathaim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the plain of Paran.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, led forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, instructed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S218_18'>18. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB7_4'>7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN14_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. souls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_5'>16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_18'>4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN15_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_3'>4. 3</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_6'>3. 6</a>. James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN15_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN15_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a lamp of fire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN15_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_15'>13 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_4'>26. 4</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_4'>34. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be builded by her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that which is good in thy eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. afflicted her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, God shall hear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_18'>25. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_62'>24 62</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN16_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The well of him that liveth and seeth me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_22'>5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upright, or, sincere.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multitude of nations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_17'>4. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of thy sojournings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_8'>7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_8'>7. 8</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_11'>4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a son of eight days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV12_8'>12. 8</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_21'>2. 21</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_22'>7. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. she shall became nations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_10'>18. 10</a> &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_2'>21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN17_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_12'>25. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_2'>13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stay.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. you have passed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Hasten.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_19'>17. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_2'>21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_6'>3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN18_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_3'>12. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_18'>22. 18</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_25'>3. 25</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_4'>18. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_17'>19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_20'>18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, punishment.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_6'>10. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thy face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_21"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits also]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gone forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN19_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_23'>29. 23</a>. Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_19'>13. 19</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR50_40'>50. 40</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM4_11'>4. 11</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_29'>17. 29</a>. Jude <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN20_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. married to an husband.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN20_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, simplicity, or, sincerity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN20_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_13'>12. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN20_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as is good in thine eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_19'>17. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_10'>18. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_8'>7. 8</a> Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL4_22'>4. 22</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_11'>11. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_12'>17. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL4_30'>4. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. if thou shalt he unto me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.31</a>
 <span class="ft">That is. The well of the oath.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN21_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, tree.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_17'>11. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Behold me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Behold me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 22.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Jam. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM2_21'>2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.14</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class="ital">The <span class="csc">Lord</span> will see,</span> or, provide.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_9'>105. 9</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_21'>44. 21</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_73'>1. 73</a> Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB6_13'>6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_3'>12. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_18'>18. 18</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_22'>44. 22</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_25'>3. 25</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_8'>3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_10'>9. 10</a>, Rebecca.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN23_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a prince of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN23_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. full money.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN23_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ears.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN23_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 gates]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gone into days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_29'>47. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_15'>13. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>15. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_4'>26. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that women which draw water go forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_43'>43.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. good of countenance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, jewel for the forehead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.43</a>
 <span class="ft">ver <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_13'>13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_53"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vessels.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.54</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_56'>56.</a> &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_59'>59.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_55"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.55</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a full year, or, ten months.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_62"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.62</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN16_14'>16. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_11'>25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN24_63"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.63</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to pray.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_32'>1. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN23_16'>23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN16_14'>16. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_62'>24. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.13</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_29'>1. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fell.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_12'>9. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_3'>12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. venison was in his mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with that red, with that red pottage.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. going to die.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN25_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_16'>12. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_15'>13. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>15. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_3'>12. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>15. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_18'>22. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. went going.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, husbandry.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. living.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.20</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Contention.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Hatred.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.22</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Room.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Seeing we saw.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. If thou shall, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.33</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, An oath.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.33</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The well of the oath.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.35</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_46'>27. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN26_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bitterness of spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hunt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_20'>11. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. trembled with a great trembling greatly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hunted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_36"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.36</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A supplanter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_37"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, supported.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_17'>12. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.39</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_28'>28.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_39"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of the fatness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Obad. <a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN27_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.46</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_35'>26. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_12'>12. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an assembly of people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of thy sojournings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were evil in the eyes, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_2'>7. 2</a>, Charran.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_1'>35. 1</a> &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN48_3'>48. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. break forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_20'>12. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_3'>12. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_18'>18. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_18'>22. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_4'>26. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN28_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.19</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The house of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lift up his feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. children.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Is there peace to him?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. yet the day is great.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a month of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.32</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, See a son.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.33</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Hearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.34</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Joined.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_2'>1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_35"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.35</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Praise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN29_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stood from bearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be built by her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Judging.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wrestlings of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, My wrestling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_13'>4. 13</a>, Nephthalim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.11</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A troop, or, company.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. In my happiness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.13</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Happy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.18</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, An hire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.20</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Dwelling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_13'>4. 13</a>, Zabulan.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Judgment.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.24</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Adding.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broken forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb at my foot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN30_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to morrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 31.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 was of our father's]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as yesterday and the day before.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_18'>28. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. teraphim</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the heart of Laban.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from good to bad.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hast stolen me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. felt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. felt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_47"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.47</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The heap of witness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_49"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.49</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A beacon, or, watch-tower.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN31_54"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, killed beasts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.2</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Two hosts, or, camps.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. field.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_13'>31. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb I am less than all, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. caused to pass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ascending of the morning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_4'>12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_10'>35. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN32_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.30</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The face of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. What is all this band to thee?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be that to thee that is thine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to the foot of the work, &amp;c. and according to the foot of the children.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. set, or, place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Wherefore is this?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.17</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Booths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_16'>7. 16</a>, Sychem.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_16'>7. 16</a>, Emmor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lambs</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN33_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.20</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, God the God of Israel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN34_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb humbled her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN34_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to her heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN34_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_6'>49. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN34_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_43'>27. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_19'>28. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.7</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The God of Beth-el.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.8</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The oak of weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_28'>32. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a little piece of ground.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.18</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The son of my sorrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.18</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The son of the right hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_4'>49. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN35_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_8'>25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_35'>1. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. souls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_4'>24. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Edom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_35'>1. 35</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_14"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 36.14</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.20</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_38'>1. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN36_43"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Edom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of his father's sojournings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. see the peace of thy brethren, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. master of dreams.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_22'>42. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hearkened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_17'>105. 17</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_13'>10. 13</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_9'>7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.33</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_28'>44. 28</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_36"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 37.36</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Medanites]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eunuch But the word doth signify not only eunuchs, but also chamberlains, courtiers, and officers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. chief of the slaughtermen, or, executioners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN37_36"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, chief marshal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.2</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R12_8'>2. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_19'>26. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_19'>26. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="ital">was evil in the eyes of the <span class="csc">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the days were multiplied.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the door of eyes, or, of Enajim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a kid of the goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in Enajim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. become a contempt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Wherefore hast thou made this breach against thee?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.29</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A breach.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN38_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.29</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R12_4'>2. 4</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN39_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 39.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 hand]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN39_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. great.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN39_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 39.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 her]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN39_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. extended kindness unto him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are your faces evil?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reckon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. remember me with thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, full of holes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. meat of Pharaoh, the work of a baker, or, cook.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reckon thee, and take thy office from thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN40_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reckoned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN40_12'>40. 12</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_20'>105 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made him run.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when thou hearest a dream, thou canst interpret it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. come to the inward parts of them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, small.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heavy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prepared of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, overseers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be not cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_21'>105. 21</a>. 1 Mac <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_53'>2. 53</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. armed, or, kiss.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_42"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, silk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_43"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Tender father.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_43"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Abrech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_45"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_50"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.50</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_20'>46. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN48_5'>48. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_50"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_51"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.51</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Forgetting.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_52"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.52</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Fruitful.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_16'>105. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN41_56"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.56</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all wherein was.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_12'>7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard things with them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_5'>37. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bound.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gathered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_5'>43. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_21'>37. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an interpreter was between them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. went forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN42_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb with us hard things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. protesting he protested.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_20'>42. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. asking he asked us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. knowing could we know.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_32'>44. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 43.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, twice by this.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 43.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, And I, as I have been, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. kill a killing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. roll himself upon us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_3'>42. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. coming down we came down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. your money came to me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_4'>18. 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_32'>24. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Is there peace to your father?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN43_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they drank largely.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. him that was over his house.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 44.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, maketh trial?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 44.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, make trial?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_3'>43. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_33'>37. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.32</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_9'>43. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN44_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. find my father.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gave forth his voice in weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_13'>7. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 45.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, terrified.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. neither let there be anger in your eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN50_20'>50. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to put for you a remnant.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was good in the eyes of Pharaoh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb let not your eye spare, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb carrying.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN45_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_4'>24. 4</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_23'>105. 23</a>. Isal. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_4'>52. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_1'>1.1</a> &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_14'>6. 14</a> Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_8'>26. 8</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_1'>5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_5'>26. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_15'>6. 15</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R14_24'>4. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.12</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R12_3'>2. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='1CH.xhtml#R14_21'>4. 21</a>. ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_3'>38. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.13</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R17_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.17</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr <a href='1CH.xhtml#R17_30'>7. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_50'>41. 50</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 46.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.21</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R17_6'>7. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='1CH.xhtml#R18_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_22'>10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 46.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thigh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN46_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 46.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they are men of cattle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 47.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 any man]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. How many are the days of the years of thy life?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. 11. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_9'>9</a>, <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 47.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as a little child is nourished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to the little ones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. led them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 47.18</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 had]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 47.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, princes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 47.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, princes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the days of the years of his life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_2'>24. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN47_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_21'>11. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_13'>28. 13</a> &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_6'>35. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_50'>41. 50</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_7'>13. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_19'>35. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 48.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heavy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_21'>11. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 48.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as fishes do increase.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN48_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 48.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fulness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb do not thou excel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_22'>35. 22</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_1'>5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, my couch is gone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, their swords are weapons of violence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, houghed oxen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an arrow-snake.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. daughters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_30'>47. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN49_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.30</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN23_16'>23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 50.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wept.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_29'>47. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 50.11</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The mourning of the Egyptians.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_16'>7. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN23_16'>23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 50.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. charged.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN45_5'>45. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 50.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to their hearts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_39'>32. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 50.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. borne.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_22'>11. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#GN50_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_19'>13. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
