<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Habakkuk 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Habakkuk</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='HAB.xhtml#HK1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='HAB.xhtml#HK2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='HAB.xhtml#HK3_0'>3</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='HK0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Habakkuk  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HK1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="HK1_1">1&#160;</span> The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did see.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_2">2&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, how long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear! <span class='add'>even</span> cry out unto thee <span class='add'>of</span> violence, and thou wilt not save!
<span class="verse" id="HK1_3">3&#160;</span> Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause <span class='add'>me</span> to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence <span class='add'>are</span> before me: and there are <span class='add'>that</span> raise up strife and contention.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for the <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wicked doth compass about the righteous; therefore <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wrong judgment proceedeth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK1_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvellously: for <span class='add'>I</span> will work a work in your days, <span class='add'>which</span> ye will not believe, though it be told <span class='add'>you</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_6">6&#160;</span> For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, <span class='add'>that</span> bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>breadth of the land, to possess the dwellingplaces <span class='add'>that are</span> not theirs.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_7">7&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> terrible and dreadful: <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>their judgment and their dignity shall proceed of themselves.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_8">8&#160;</span> Their horses also are swifter than the leopards, and are more <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fierce than the <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evening wolves: and their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from far; they shall fly as the eagle <span class='add'>that</span> hasteth to eat.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_9">9&#160;</span> They shall come all for violence: <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their faces shall sup up <span class='add'>as</span> the east wind, and they shall gather the captivity as the sand.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_10">10&#160;</span> And they shall scoff at the kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_11">11&#160;</span>Then shall <span class='add'>his</span> mind change, and he shall pass over, and offend, <span class='add'>imputing</span> this his power unto his god. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Art</span> thou not from everlasting, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, mine Holy One? we shall not die. O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mighty God, thou hast <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>established them for correction.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Thou art</span> of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>iniquity: wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal treacherously, <span class='add'>and</span> holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth <span class='add'>the man that is</span> more righteous than he?
<span class="verse" id="HK1_14">14&#160;</span> And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>creeping things, <span class='add'>that have</span> no ruler over them?
<span class="verse" id="HK1_15">15&#160;</span> They take up all of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>drag: therefore they rejoice and are glad.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their portion <span class='add'>is</span> fat, and their meat <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>plenteous.
<span class="verse" id="HK1_17">17&#160;</span> Shall they therefore empty their net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HK2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK2_1">1&#160;</span> I will <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stand upon my watch, and set me upon the <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tower, and will watch to see what he will say <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unto me, and what I shall answer <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when I am reproved.
<span class="verse" id="HK2_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make <span class='add'>it</span> plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.
<span class="verse" id="HK2_3">3&#160;</span> For the vision <span class='add'>is</span> yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>surely come, it will not tarry.
<span class="verse" id="HK2_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, his soul <span class='add'>which</span> is lifted up is not upright in him: but the <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>just shall live by his faith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK2_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Yea also, because he transgresseth by wine, <span class='add'>he is</span> a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his desire as hell, and <span class='add'>is</span> as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people:
<span class="verse" id="HK2_6">6&#160;</span> Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Woe to him that increaseth <span class='add'>that which is</span> not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay!
<span class="verse" id="HK2_7">7&#160;</span> Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee, and thou shalt be for booties unto them?
<span class="verse" id="HK2_8">8&#160;</span> Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee; because of men’s <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood, and <span class='add'>for</span> the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK2_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Woe to him that <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>power of evil!
<span class="verse" id="HK2_10">10&#160;</span> Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many people, and hast sinned <span class='add'>against</span> thy soul.
<span class="verse" id="HK2_11">11&#160;</span> For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>beam out of the timber shall <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>answer it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Woe to him that buildeth a town with <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood, and stablisheth a city by iniquity!
<span class="verse" id="HK2_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>is it</span> not of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts that the people shall labour in the very fire, and the people shall weary themselves <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for very vanity?
<span class="verse" id="HK2_14">14&#160;</span> For the earth shall be filled <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with the <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>knowledge of the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as the waters cover the sea.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK2_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy bottle to <span class='add'>him</span>, and makest <span class='add'>him</span> drunken also, that thou mayest look on their nakedness!
<span class="verse" id="HK2_16">16&#160;</span> Thou art filled <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with shame for glory: <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing <span class='add'>shall be</span> on thy glory.
<span class="verse" id="HK2_17">17&#160;</span> For the violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, and the spoil of beasts, <span class='add'>which</span> made them afraid, because of men’s blood, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK2_18">18&#160;</span>¶ What profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>teacher of lies, that <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols?
<span class="verse" id="HK2_19">19&#160;</span> Woe unto him that saith to the wood, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise, it shall teach! Behold, it <span class='add'>is</span> laid over with gold and silver, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no breath at all in the midst of it.
<span class="verse" id="HK2_20">20&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> in his holy temple: <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>let all the earth keep silence before him.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HK3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK3_1">1&#160;</span> A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upon Shigionoth.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_2">2&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I have heard <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy speech, <span class='add'>and</span> was afraid: O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK3_3">3&#160;</span> God came from <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_4">4&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>his</span> brightness was as the light; he had <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>horns <span class='add'>coming</span> out of his hand: and there <span class='add'>was</span> the hiding of his power.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_5">5&#160;</span> Before him went the pestilence, and <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>burning coals went forth at his feet.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_6">6&#160;</span> He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his ways <span class='add'>are</span> everlasting.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_7">7&#160;</span> I saw the tents of <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Cushan <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in affliction: <span class='add'>and</span> the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_8">8&#160;</span> Was the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> displeased against the rivers? <span class='add'>was</span> thine anger against the rivers? <span class='add'>was</span> thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thy chariots of salvation?
<span class="verse" id="HK3_9">9&#160;</span> Thy bow was made quite naked, <span class='add'>according</span> to the oaths of the tribes, <span class='add'>even thy</span> word. Selah. <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_10">10&#160;</span> The mountains saw thee, <span class='add'>and</span> they trembled: the overflowing of the water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, <span class='add'>and</span> lifted up his hands on high.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_11">11&#160;</span> The sun <span class='add'>and</span> moon <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stood still in their habitation: <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>at the light of thine <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>arrows they went, <span class='add'>and</span> at the shining of thy glittering spear.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_12">12&#160;</span> Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_13">13&#160;</span> Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, <span class='add'>even</span> for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_14">14&#160;</span> Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his villages: they <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing <span class='add'>was</span> as to devour the poor secretly.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_15">15&#160;</span> Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, <span class='add'>through</span> the <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>heap of great waters.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK3_16">16&#160;</span> When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he will <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>invade them with his troops.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HK3_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither <span class='add'>shall</span> fruit <span class='add'>be</span> in the vines; the labour of the olive shall <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and <span class='add'>there shall be</span> no herd in the stalls:
<span class="verse" id="HK3_18">18&#160;</span> Yet I will rejoice in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will joy in the God of my salvation.
<span class="verse" id="HK3_19">19&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God <span class='add'>is</span> my strength, and he will make my feet like <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hinds’ <span class='add'>feet</span>, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stringed instruments.</div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_7'>21 7</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR12_1'>12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wrested.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_41'>13. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb breadths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from them shall proceed the judgment of these, and the captivity of these.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb sharp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the supping up of their faces, &amp;c. or, their faces shall look toward the east.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the opposition of their faces toward the east</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rock.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. founded.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grievance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, moving.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, flue net.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dainty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK1_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS21_8'>21. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fenced place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when I am argued with.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon my reproof, or, arguing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_37'>10. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_36'>3. 36</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_17'>1. 17</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_11'>3. 11</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_38'>10. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, How much more.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ho, he.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_13'>22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gaineth an evil gain.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. palm of the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, piece, or, fastening.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, witness against it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK24_9'>24. 9</a>. Nah. <a href='NAM.xhtml#NM8_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in vain?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">by knowing the glory of the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_9'>11. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, more with shame than with glory.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_26'>25. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. 10. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_8'>8</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_14'>14</a>. Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC10_2'>10. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fashioner of his fashion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS11_4'>11. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK2_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be silent all the earth before him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, according to variable songs, or, tunes, called in Hebrew, Shigionoth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thy report, or, thy hearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, preserve alive.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the south.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bright beams out of his side.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, burning diseases.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ethiopia.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, under affliction, or, vanity</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thy chariots were salvation?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Thou didst cleave the rivers of the earth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_12'>10. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thine arrows walked in the light, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_11'>10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. making naked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were tempestuous.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mud.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cut them in pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lie.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_34'>22 34</a>. Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_33'>18. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HK3_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. neginoth.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
