<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Haggai 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Haggai</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='HAG.xhtml#HG1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='HAG.xhtml#HG2_0'>2</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='HG0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Haggai  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HG1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="HG1_1">1&#160;</span> In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>governor of Judah, and to <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG1_2">2&#160;</span> Thus speaketh the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is not come, the time that the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house should be built.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_3">3&#160;</span> Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by Haggai the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG1_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it</span> time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this house <span class='add'>lie</span> waste?
<span class="verse" id="HG1_5">5&#160;</span> Now therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Consider your ways.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_6">6&#160;</span> Ye have <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages <span class='add'>to put it</span> into a bag <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with holes.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HG1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Consider your ways.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_8">8&#160;</span> Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_9">9&#160;</span> Ye looked for much, and, lo, <span class='add'>it came</span> to little; and when ye brought <span class='add'>it</span> home, I did <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blow upon it. Why? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. Because of mine house that <span class='add'>is</span> waste, and ye run every man unto his own house.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed <span class='add'>from</span> her fruit.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_11">11&#160;</span> And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon <span class='add'>that</span> which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labour of the hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HG1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God had sent him, and the people did fear before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_13">13&#160;</span> Then spake Haggai the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> messenger in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> message unto the people, saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> with you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HG1_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, their God,
<span class="verse" id="HG1_15">15&#160;</span> In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HG2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HG2_1">1&#160;</span> In the seventh <span class='add'>month</span>, in the one and twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by the prophet Haggai, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG2_2">2&#160;</span> Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG2_3">3&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do ye see it now? <span class='add'>is it</span> not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?
<span class="verse" id="HG2_4">4&#160;</span> Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and work: for I <span class='add'>am</span> with you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts:
<span class="verse" id="HG2_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>According to</span> the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_6">6&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Yet once, it <span class='add'>is</span> a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry <span class='add'>land;</span>
<span class="verse" id="HG2_7">7&#160;</span> And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_8">8&#160;</span> The silver <span class='add'>is</span> mine, and the gold <span class='add'>is</span> mine, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_9">9&#160;</span> The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the former, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HG2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ In the four and twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> of the ninth <span class='add'>month</span>, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by Haggai the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG2_11">11&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Ask now the priests <span class='add'>concerning</span> the law, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG2_12">12&#160;</span> If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_13">13&#160;</span> Then said Haggai, If <span class='add'>one that is</span> unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_14">14&#160;</span> Then answered Haggai, and said, So <span class='add'>is</span> this people, and so <span class='add'>is</span> this nation before me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and so <span class='add'>is</span> every work of their hands; and that which they offer there <span class='add'>is</span> unclean.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_15">15&#160;</span> And now, I pray you, consider from this day and upward, from before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="HG2_16">16&#160;</span>Since those <span class='add'>days</span> were, when <span class='add'>one</span> came to an heap of twenty <span class='add'>measures</span>, there were <span class='add'>but</span> ten: when <span class='add'>one</span> came to the pressfat for to draw out fifty <span class='add'>vessels</span> out of the press, there were <span class='add'>but</span> twenty.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_17">17&#160;</span> I smote you <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all the labours of your hands; yet ye <span class='add'>turned</span> not to me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_18">18&#160;</span> Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth <span class='add'>month, even</span> from the day that the foundation of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> temple was laid, consider <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_19">19&#160;</span> Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive tree, hath not brought forth: from this day will I bless <span class='add'>you</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HG2_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Haggai in the four and twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, saying,
<span class="verse" id="HG2_21">21&#160;</span> Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth;
<span class="verse" id="HG2_22">22&#160;</span> And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother.
<span class="verse" id="HG2_23">23&#160;</span> In that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and will make thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of Haggai.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, captain</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Josuah]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Set your heart on your ways.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_38'>28 38</a>. Mic. 6. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_14'>14</a>. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pierced through.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, blow it away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_23'>28. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG2_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_26'>12. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HG2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM4_9'>4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
