<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Hosea 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Hosea</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS14_0'>14</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='HS0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Hosea  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="HS1_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that came unto Hosea, the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, <span class='add'>and</span> Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS1_2">2&#160;</span> The beginning of the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by Hosea. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, <span class='add'>departing</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS1_3">3&#160;</span> So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which conceived, and bare him a son.
<span class="verse" id="HS1_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little <span class='add'>while</span>, and I will <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="HS1_5">5&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And she conceived again, and bare a daughter. And <span class='add'>God</span> said unto him, Call her name <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Lo-ruhamah: for <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>but I will utterly take them away.
<span class="verse" id="HS1_7">7&#160;</span> But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS1_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son.
<span class="verse" id="HS1_9">9&#160;</span> Then said <span class='add'>God</span>, Call his name <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Lo-ammi: for ye <span class='add'>are</span> not my people, and I will not be your <span class='add'>God</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered; <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in the place where it was said unto them, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> not my people, <span class='add'>there</span> it shall be said unto them, <span class='add'>Ye are</span> the sons of the living God.
<span class="verse" id="HS1_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out of the land: for great <span class='add'>shall be</span> the day of Jezreel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS2_1">1&#160;</span> Say ye unto your brethren, <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ammi; and to your sisters, <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ru-hamah.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_2">2&#160;</span> Plead with your mother, plead: for <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>she <span class='add'>is</span> not my wife, neither <span class='add'>am</span> I her husband: let her therefore put away her <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts;
<span class="verse" id="HS2_3">3&#160;</span> Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_4">4&#160;</span> And I will not have mercy upon her children; for they <span class='add'>be</span> the children of whoredoms.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_5">5&#160;</span> For their mother hath played the harlot: she that conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers, that give <span class='add'>me</span> my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>drink.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS2_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>make a wall, that she shall not find her paths.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_7">7&#160;</span> And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find <span class='add'>them:</span> then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband; for then <span class='add'>was it</span> better with me than now.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_8">8&#160;</span> For she did not know that I gave her corn, and <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>which</span> they prepared for Baal.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>recover my wool and my flax <span class='add'>given</span> to cover her nakedness.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_10">10&#160;</span> And now will I discover her <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of mine hand.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_11">11&#160;</span> I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_12">12&#160;</span> And I will <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy her vines and her fig trees, whereof she hath said, These <span class='add'>are</span> my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_13">13&#160;</span> And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with her earrings and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>comfortably unto her.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_15">15&#160;</span> And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_16">16&#160;</span> And it shall be at that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>that</span> thou shalt call me <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ishi; and shalt call me no more <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Baali.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_17">17&#160;</span> For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their name.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_18">18&#160;</span> And in that day will I make a <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and <span class='add'>with</span> the creeping things of the ground: and I will break the bow and the sword and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie down safely.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_19">19&#160;</span> And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in mercies.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_20">20&#160;</span> I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness: and thou shalt know the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_21">21&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth;
<span class="verse" id="HS2_22">22&#160;</span> And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.
<span class="verse" id="HS2_23">23&#160;</span> And I will sow her unto me in the earth; and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>will say to <span class='add'>them which were</span> not my people, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my people; and they shall say, <span class='add'>Thou art</span> my God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS3_1">1&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of <span class='add'>her</span> friend, yet an adulteress, according to the love of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> toward the children of Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of wine.
<span class="verse" id="HS3_2">2&#160;</span> So I bought her to me for fifteen <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver, and <span class='add'>for</span> an homer of barley, and an <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>half homer of barley:
<span class="verse" id="HS3_3">3&#160;</span> And I said unto her, Thou shalt <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>abide for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be for <span class='add'>another</span> man: so <span class='add'>will</span> I also <span class='add'>be</span> for thee.
<span class="verse" id="HS3_4">4&#160;</span> For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an image, and without an ephod, and <span class='add'>without</span> teraphim:
<span class="verse" id="HS3_5">5&#160;</span> Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>David their king; and shall fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and his goodness in the <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>latter days.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS4_1">1&#160;</span> Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye children of Israel: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath a <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because <span class='add'>there is</span> no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_2">2&#160;</span> By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood toucheth blood.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_4">4&#160;</span> Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another: for <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy people <span class='add'>are</span> as they that strive with the priest.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the prophet also shall fall with thee in the night, and I will <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy thy mother.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS4_6">6&#160;</span>¶ My people are <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_7">7&#160;</span> As they were increased, so they sinned against me: <span class='add'>therefore</span> will I change their glory into shame.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_8">8&#160;</span> They eat up the sin of my people, and they <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set their heart on their iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_9">9&#160;</span> And there shall be, <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>like people, like priest: and I will <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punish them for their ways, and <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>reward them their doings.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_10">10&#160;</span> For they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase: because they have left off to take heed to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_11">11&#160;</span> Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS4_12">12&#160;</span>¶ My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused <span class='add'>them</span> to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_13">13&#160;</span> They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof <span class='add'>is</span> good: therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with whores, and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people <span class='add'>that</span> doth not understand shall <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fall.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS4_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, <span class='add'>yet</span> let not Judah offend; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Beth-aven, nor swear, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_16">16&#160;</span> For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will feed them as a lamb in a large place.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_17">17&#160;</span> Ephraim <span class='add'>is</span> joined to idols: let him alone.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_18">18&#160;</span> Their drink <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rulers <span class='add'>with</span> shame do love, Give ye.
<span class="verse" id="HS4_19">19&#160;</span> The wind hath bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS5_1">1&#160;</span> Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye house of Israel; and give ye ear, O house of the king; for judgment <span class='add'>is</span> toward you, because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_2">2&#160;</span> And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>though I <span class='add'>have been</span> <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a rebuker of them all.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_3">3&#160;</span> I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom, <span class='add'>and</span> Israel is defiled.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God: for the spirit of whoredoms <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of them, and they have not known the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_5">5&#160;</span> And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah also shall fall with them.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_6">6&#160;</span> They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; but they shall not find <span class='add'>him;</span> he hath withdrawn himself from them.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_7">7&#160;</span> They have dealt treacherously against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for they have begotten strange children: now shall a month devour them with their portions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS5_8">8&#160;</span> Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, <span class='add'>and</span> the trumpet in Ramah: cry aloud <span class='add'>at</span> Beth-aven, after thee, O Benjamin.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_9">9&#160;</span> Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall surely be.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_10">10&#160;</span> The princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: <span class='add'>therefore</span> I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_11">11&#160;</span> Ephraim <span class='add'>is</span> oppressed  <span class='add'>and</span> broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the commandment.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore <span class='add'>will</span> I <span class='add'>be</span> unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rottenness.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_13">13&#160;</span> When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah <span class='add'>saw</span> his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to king Jareb: yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound.
<span class="verse" id="HS5_14">14&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>will be</span> unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah: I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, will tear and go away; I will take away, and none shall rescue <span class='add'>him</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS5_15">15&#160;</span>¶ I will go <span class='add'>and</span> return to my place, <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>till they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS6_1">1&#160;</span> Come, and let us return unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_3">3&#160;</span> Then shall we know, <span class='add'>if</span> we follow on to know the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter <span class='add'>and</span> former rain unto the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS6_4">4&#160;</span>¶ O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>goodness <span class='add'>is</span> as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore have I hewed <span class='add'>them</span> by the prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and thy judgments <span class='add'>are as</span> the light <span class='add'>that</span> goeth forth.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_6">6&#160;</span> For I desired <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_7">7&#160;</span> But they <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_8">8&#160;</span> Gilead <span class='add'>is</span> a city of them that work iniquity, <span class='add'>and is</span> <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>polluted with blood.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_9">9&#160;</span> And as troops of robbers wait for a man, <span class='add'>so</span> the company of priests murder in the way <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by consent: for they commit <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lewdness.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_10">10&#160;</span> I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel: there <span class='add'>is</span> the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.
<span class="verse" id="HS6_11">11&#160;</span> Also, O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thee, when I returned the captivity of my people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS7_1">1&#160;</span> When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood; and the thief cometh in, <span class='add'>and</span> the troop of robbers <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spoileth without.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_2">2&#160;</span> And they <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consider not in their hearts <span class='add'>that</span> I remember all their wickedness: now their own doings have beset them about; they are before my face.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_3">3&#160;</span> They make the king glad with their wickedness, and the princes with their lies.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_4">4&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>who</span> ceaseth <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>from raising after he hath kneaded the dough, until it be leavened.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_5">5&#160;</span> In the day of our king the princes have made <span class='add'>him</span> sick <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with bottles of wine; he stretched out his hand with scorners.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_6">6&#160;</span> For they have <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in the morning it burneth as a flaming fire.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_7">7&#160;</span> They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their judges; all their kings are fallen: <span class='add'>there is</span> none among them that calleth unto me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS7_8">8&#160;</span> Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake not turned.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_9">9&#160;</span> Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth <span class='add'>it</span> not: yea, gray hairs are <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_10">10&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pride of Israel testifieth to his face: and they do not return to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, nor seek him for all this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS7_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_12">12&#160;</span> When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them; I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will chastise them, as their congregation hath heard.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_13">13&#160;</span> Woe unto them! for they have fled from me: <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destruction unto them! because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_14">14&#160;</span> And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, <span class='add'>and</span> they rebel against me.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_15">15&#160;</span> Though I <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have bound <span class='add'>and</span> strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine mischief against me.
<span class="verse" id="HS7_16">16&#160;</span> They return, <span class='add'>but</span> not to the most High: they are like a deceitful bow: their princes shall fall by the sword for the <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rage of their tongue: this <span class='add'>shall be</span> their derision in the land of Egypt.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS8_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Set</span> the trumpet to <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy mouth. <span class='add'>He shall come</span> as an eagle against the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because they have transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my law.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_2">2&#160;</span> Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_3">3&#160;</span> Israel hath cast off <span class='add'>the thing that is</span> good: the enemy shall pursue him.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_4">4&#160;</span> They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and I knew <span class='add'>it</span> not: of their silver and their gold have they made them idols, that they may be cut off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS8_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast <span class='add'>thee</span> off; mine anger is kindled against them: how long <span class='add'>will it be</span> ere they attain to innocency?
<span class="verse" id="HS8_6">6&#160;</span> For from Israel <span class='add'>was</span> it also: the workman made it; therefore it <span class='add'>is</span> not God: but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_7">7&#160;</span> For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind: it hath no <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stalk: the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the strangers shall swallow it up.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS8_8">8&#160;</span> Israel is swallowed up: now shall they be among the Gentiles as a vessel wherein <span class='add'>is</span> no pleasure.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_9">9&#160;</span> For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lovers.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_10">10&#160;</span> Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather them, and they shall <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sorrow a little for the burden of the king of princes.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_11">11&#160;</span> Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_12">12&#160;</span> I have written to him the great things of my law, <span class='add'>but</span> they were counted as a strange thing.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> They sacrifice flesh <span class='add'>for</span> the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat <span class='add'>it; but</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> accepteth them not; now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="HS8_14">14&#160;</span> For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS9_1">1&#160;</span> Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as <span class='add'>other</span> people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>reward <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upon every cornfloor.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_2">2&#160;</span> The floor and the <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail in her.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_3">3&#160;</span> They shall not dwell in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> land; but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean <span class='add'>things</span> in Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_4">4&#160;</span> They shall not offer wine <span class='add'>offerings</span> to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither shall they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices <span class='add'>shall be</span> unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_5">5&#160;</span> What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="HS9_6">6&#160;</span> For, lo, they are gone because of <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destruction: Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them: <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the pleasant <span class='add'>places</span> for their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns <span class='add'>shall be</span> in their tabernacles.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS9_7">7&#160;</span> The days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come; Israel shall know <span class='add'>it:</span> the prophet <span class='add'>is</span> a fool, the <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spiritual man <span class='add'>is</span> mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_8">8&#160;</span> The watchman of Ephraim <span class='add'>was</span> with my God: <span class='add'>but</span> the prophet <span class='add'>is</span> a snare of a fowler in all his ways, <span class='add'>and</span> hatred <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in the house of his God.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_9">9&#160;</span> They have deeply corrupted <span class='add'>themselves</span>, as in the days of <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gibeah: <span class='add'>therefore</span> he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_10">10&#160;</span> I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness; I saw your fathers as the firstripe in the fig tree at her first time: <span class='add'>but</span> they went to <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Baal-peor, and separated themselves unto <span class='add'>that</span> shame; and <span class='add'>their</span> abominations were according as they loved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS9_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> Ephraim, their glory shall <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_12">12&#160;</span> Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, <span class='add'>that there shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> a man <span class='add'>left:</span> yea, woe also to them when I depart from them!
<span class="verse" id="HS9_13">13&#160;</span> Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, <span class='add'>is</span> planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_14">14&#160;</span> Give them, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: what wilt thou give? give them a <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_15">15&#160;</span> All their wickedness <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>is</span> in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more: all their princes <span class='add'>are</span> revolters.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_16">16&#160;</span> Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the beloved <span class='add'>fruit</span> of their womb.
<span class="verse" id="HS9_17">17&#160;</span> My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him: and they shall be wanderers among the nations.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS10_1">1&#160;</span> Israel <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself: according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars; according to the goodness of his land they have made goodly <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>images.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty: he shall <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>break down their altars, he shall spoil their images.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_3">3&#160;</span> For now they shall say, We have no king, because we feared not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; what then should a king do to us?
<span class="verse" id="HS10_4">4&#160;</span> They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_5">5&#160;</span> The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because of the calves of Beth-aven: for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the priests thereof <span class='add'>that</span> rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is departed from it.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_6">6&#160;</span> It shall be also carried unto Assyria <span class='add'>for</span> a present to <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>king Jareb: Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> Samaria, her king is cut off as the foam upon <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the water.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_8">8&#160;</span> The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars; <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS10_9">9&#160;</span> O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not overtake them.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> in my desire that I should chastise them; and the people shall be gathered against them, <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when they shall bind themselves in their two furrows.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_11">11&#160;</span> And Ephraim <span class='add'>is as</span> an heifer <span class='add'>that is</span> taught, <span class='add'>and</span> loveth to tread out <span class='add'>the corn;</span> but I passed over upon <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride; Judah shall plow, <span class='add'>and</span> Jacob shall break his clods.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_12">12&#160;</span> Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>break up your fallow ground: for <span class='add'>it is</span> time to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_13">13&#160;</span> Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity; ye have eaten the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Beth-arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon <span class='add'>her</span> children.
<span class="verse" id="HS10_15">15&#160;</span> So shall Beth-el do unto you because of <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>your great wickedness: in a morning shall the king of Israel utterly be cut off.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS11_1">1&#160;</span> When Israel <span class='add'>was</span> a child, then I loved him, and <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>called my son out of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto Baalim, and burned incense to graven images.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_3">3&#160;</span> I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_4">4&#160;</span> I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was to them as they that <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS11_5">5&#160;</span>¶ He shall not return into the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his king, because they refused to return.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_6">6&#160;</span> And the sword shall abide on his cities, and shall consume his branches, and devour <span class='add'>them</span>, because of their own counsels.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_7">7&#160;</span> And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called them to the most High, <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>none at all would exalt <span class='add'>him</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS11_8">8&#160;</span> How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? <span class='add'>how</span> shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Admah? <span class='add'>how</span> shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_9">9&#160;</span> I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I <span class='add'>am</span> God, and not man; the Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not enter into the city.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_10">10&#160;</span> They shall walk after the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: he shall roar like a lion: when he shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_11">11&#160;</span> They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS11_12">12&#160;</span> Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with the saints.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS12_1">1&#160;</span> Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he daily increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with the Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_2">2&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath also a controversy with Judah, and will <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he recompense him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS12_3">3&#160;</span>¶ He took his brother <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>had power with God:
<span class="verse" id="HS12_4">4&#160;</span> Yea, he had power over the angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him <span class='add'>in</span> <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Beth-el, and there he spake with us;
<span class="verse" id="HS12_5">5&#160;</span> Even the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>memorial.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS12_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>He is</span> <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a merchant, the balances of deceit <span class='add'>are</span> in his hand: he loveth to <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oppress.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_8">8&#160;</span> And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance: <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>in</span> all my labours they shall find none iniquity in me <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that <span class='add'>were</span> sin.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_9">9&#160;</span>And I <span class='add'>that am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God from the land of Egypt will yet make thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_10">10&#160;</span> I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by the ministry of the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is there</span> iniquity <span class='add'>in</span> Gilead? surely they are vanity: they sacrifice bullocks in <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gilgal; yea, their altars <span class='add'>are</span> as heaps in the furrows of the fields.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_12">12&#160;</span> And Jacob <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fled into the country of Syria, and Israel <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>served for a wife, and for a wife he kept <span class='add'>sheep</span>.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And by a prophet the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.
<span class="verse" id="HS12_14">14&#160;</span> Ephraim provoked <span class='add'>him</span> to anger <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>most bitterly: therefore shall he leave his <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood upon him, and his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS13_1">1&#160;</span> When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_2">2&#160;</span> And now <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of their silver, <span class='add'>and</span> idols according to their own understanding, all of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, Let <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the men that sacrifice kiss the calves.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>that passeth away, as the chaff <span class='add'>that</span> is driven with the whirlwind out of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_4">4&#160;</span>Yet <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no god but me: for <span class='add'>there is</span> no saviour beside me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS13_5">5&#160;</span>¶ I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>great drought.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_6">6&#160;</span> According to their pasture, so were they filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore I will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way will I observe <span class='add'>them:</span>
<span class="verse" id="HS13_8">8&#160;</span> I will meet them as a bear <span class='add'>that is</span> bereaved <span class='add'>of her whelps</span>, and will rend the caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a lion: <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the wild beast shall tear them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS13_9">9&#160;</span>¶ O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>is</span> thine help.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_10">10&#160;</span> I will be thy king: where <span class='add'>is any other</span> that may save thee in all thy cities? and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a king and princes?
<span class="verse" id="HS13_11">11&#160;</span> I gave thee a <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>king in mine anger, and took <span class='add'>him</span> away in my wrath.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_12">12&#160;</span> The iniquity of Ephraim <span class='add'>is</span> bound up; his sin <span class='add'>is</span> hid.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_13">13&#160;</span> The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him: he <span class='add'>is</span> an unwise son; for he should not stay <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>long in <span class='add'>the place of</span> the breaking forth of children.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_14">14&#160;</span> I will ransom them from <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the power of the grave; I will redeem them from death: <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS13_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Though he be fruitful among <span class='add'>his</span> brethren, <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>an east wind shall come, the wind of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall come up from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: he shall spoil the treasure of all <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant vessels.
<span class="verse" id="HS13_16">16&#160;</span> Samaria shall become desolate; for she hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='HS14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS14_1">1&#160;</span> O Israel, return unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="HS14_2">2&#160;</span> Take with you words, and turn to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>receive <span class='add'>us</span> graciously: so will we render the <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>calves of our lips.
<span class="verse" id="HS14_3">3&#160;</span> Asshur shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, <span class='add'>Ye are</span> our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS14_4">4&#160;</span>¶ I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is turned away from him.
<span class="verse" id="HS14_5">5&#160;</span> I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>grow as the lily, and <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast forth his roots as Lebanon.
<span class="verse" id="HS14_6">6&#160;</span> His branches <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.
<span class="verse" id="HS14_7">7&#160;</span> They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they shall revive <span class='add'>as</span> the corn, and <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>grow as the vine: the <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scent thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> as the wine of Lebanon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="HS14_8">8&#160;</span> Ephraim <span class='add'>shall say</span>, What have I to do any more with idols? I have heard <span class='add'>him</span>, and observed him: I <span class='add'>am</span> like a green fir tree. From me is thy fruit found.
<span class="verse" id="HS14_9">9&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> wise, and he shall understand these <span class='add'>things</span>? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>are</span> right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Not having obtained mercy</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I will not add any more to.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that I should altogether pardon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Not my people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. 9. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_25'>25</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, instead of that</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS1_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR3_18'>3. 18</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK34_0'>34.</a> &amp;c <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK37_0'>37.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, My people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Having obtained mercy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS50_1'>50 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_25'>16. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_4'>16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. drinks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wall a wall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. new wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wherewith they made Baal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, take away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. folly, or, villany.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make desolate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, friendly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to her heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, My husband.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, My lord.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_23'>5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS2_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_26'>9. 26</a> 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_10'>2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS3_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb of grapes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lethech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT21_13'>21. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS3_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a standing. or, statue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_9'>30. 9</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK34_23'>34. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_2'>2 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_2'>6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 this]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lift up their soul to their iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_2'>24 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visit upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cause to return.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Shall I not, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, be punished</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_29'>12. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is gone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS4_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shields.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a correction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. They will not give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Their doings will not suffer them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a worm.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to the king of Jareb: or, to the king that should plead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS5_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. till they be guilty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_4'>15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mercy, or, kindness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that thy judgments might be, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_22'>15 22</a> Eccles <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_1'>5 1</a>. Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_13'>9. 13</a> &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_7'>12. 7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, like Adam.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cunning for blood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with one shoulder, or, to Shechem.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS6_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, enormity</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. evils</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strippeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. say not to.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the raiser will cease.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from waking.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with heat through wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, applied.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sprinkled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS5_5'>5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spoil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, chastened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS7_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_9'>73. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS8_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the roof of thy mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS8_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, standing corn.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS8_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. loves</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS8_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, begin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS8_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, In the sacrifices of mine offerings they, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR44_17'>44. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, winefat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spoil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, their silver shall be desired, the nettle, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. man of the spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG19_18'>19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_3'>25 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 flee]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that casteth the fruit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS9_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the desires.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a vine emptying the fruit which it giveth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. statues, or, standing images.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He hath divided their heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. behead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Chemarim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS5_13'>5. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the face of the water.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_19'>2 19</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_30'>23. 30</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_16'>6. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_6'>9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when I shall bind them for their two transgressions, or, in their two habitations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the beauty of her neck.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_3'>4. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_34'>18 34</a>. &amp;c <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_13'>19. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS10_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the evil of your evil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT2_15'>2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS11_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lift up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS11_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb together they exalted not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS11_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>19. 24</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM4_11'>4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS11_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with the most holy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visit upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_26'>25. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb was a prince, or, behaved himself princely</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_24'>32. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. 35. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_9'>9</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_15'>3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Canaan</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, deceive.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, all my labours suffice me not: he shall have punishment of iniquity in whom is sin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS4_15'>4 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS9_15'>9 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_5'>28. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. 29. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN29_20'>20</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN29_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 12. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_50'>50</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_51'>51</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_3'>13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with bitternesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS12_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they add to sin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the sacrificers of men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 it]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_11'>43. 11</a> ch. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_9'>12. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. droughts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the beast of the field.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb in thy help</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S18_5'>8. 5</a> &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_23'>15. 23</a>. &amp;c <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_1'>16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a time</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_55'>15. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK19_12'>19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS13_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vessels of desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, give good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_15'>13. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, blossom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strike.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall go.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, blossom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#HS14_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, memorial.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
