<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Isaiah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Isaiah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_0'>51</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_0'>52</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_0'>53</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_0'>54</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_0'>55</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_0'>56</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_0'>57</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_0'>58</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_0'>59</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_0'>60</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_0'>61</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_0'>62</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_0'>63</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS64_0'>64</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_0'>65</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_0'>66</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='IS0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of the Prophet Isaiah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="IS1_1">1&#160;</span> The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, <span class='add'>and</span> Hezekiah, kings of Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master’s crib: <span class='add'>but</span> Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_4">4&#160;</span> Ah sinful nation, a people <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gone away backward.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_6">6&#160;</span> From the sole of the foot even unto the head <span class='add'>there is</span> no soundness in it; <span class='add'>but</span> wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ointment.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Your country <span class='add'>is</span> desolate, your cities <span class='add'>are</span> burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and <span class='add'>it is</span> desolate, <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as overthrown by strangers.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_8">8&#160;</span> And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Except the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sodom, <span class='add'>and</span> we should have been like unto Gomorrah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_11">11&#160;</span> To what purpose <span class='add'>is</span> the multitude of your <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sacrifices unto me? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he goats.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_12">12&#160;</span> When ye come <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?
<span class="verse" id="IS1_13">13&#160;</span> Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with; <span class='add'>it is</span> <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>iniquity, even the solemn meeting.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_14">14&#160;</span> Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_15">15&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are full of <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cease to do evil;
<span class="verse" id="IS1_17">17&#160;</span> Learn to do well; seek judgment, <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_18">18&#160;</span> Come now, and let us reason together, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_19">19&#160;</span> If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:
<span class="verse" id="IS1_20">20&#160;</span> But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_21">21&#160;</span>¶ How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_22">22&#160;</span> Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water:
<span class="verse" id="IS1_23">23&#160;</span> Thy princes <span class='add'>are</span> rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_24">24&#160;</span> Therefore saith the Lord, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And I will turn my hand upon thee, and <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin:
<span class="verse" id="IS1_26">26&#160;</span> And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the faithful city.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_27">27&#160;</span> Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>her converts with righteousness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And the <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners <span class='add'>shall be</span> together, and they that forsake the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be consumed.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_29">29&#160;</span> For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_30">30&#160;</span> For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.
<span class="verse" id="IS1_31">31&#160;</span> And the strong shall be as tow, <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench <span class='add'>them</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_1">1&#160;</span> The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_2">2&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it shall come to pass in the last days, <span class='add'>that</span> the mountain of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house shall be <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_3">3&#160;</span> And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_4">4&#160;</span> And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_5">5&#160;</span> O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>from the east, and <span class='add'>are</span> soothsayers like the Philistines, and they <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>please themselves in the children of strangers.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_7">7&#160;</span> Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> end of their chariots:
<span class="verse" id="IS2_8">8&#160;</span> Their land also is full of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made:
<span class="verse" id="IS2_9">9&#160;</span> And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the glory of his majesty.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_11">11&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> alone shall be exalted in that day.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_12">12&#160;</span> For the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon every <span class='add'>one that is</span> proud and lofty, and upon every <span class='add'>one that is</span> lifted up; and he shall be brought low:
<span class="verse" id="IS2_13">13&#160;</span> And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, <span class='add'>that are</span> high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan,
<span class="verse" id="IS2_14">14&#160;</span> And upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills <span class='add'>that are</span> lifted up,
<span class="verse" id="IS2_15">15&#160;</span> And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall,
<span class="verse" id="IS2_16">16&#160;</span> And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant pictures.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_17">17&#160;</span> And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> alone shall be exalted in that day.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_18">18&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the idols he shall utterly abolish.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_19">19&#160;</span> And they shall go into the <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>holes of the rocks, and into the caves of <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the earth, for fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_20">20&#160;</span> In that day a man shall cast <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>which they made <span class='add'>each one</span> for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;
<span class="verse" id="IS2_21">21&#160;</span> To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS2_22">22&#160;</span> Cease ye from man, whose breath <span class='add'>is</span> in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_1">1&#160;</span> For, behold, the Lord, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_2">2&#160;</span> The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_3">3&#160;</span> The captain of fifty, and <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>eloquent orator.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_4">4&#160;</span> And I will give <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>children <span class='add'>to be</span> their princes, and babes shall rule over them.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_5">5&#160;</span> And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honourable.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_6">6&#160;</span> When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and <span class='add'>let</span> this ruin <span class='add'>be</span> under thy hand:
<span class="verse" id="IS3_7">7&#160;</span> In that day shall he <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>swear, saying, I will not be an <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>healer; for in my house <span class='add'>is</span> neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_8">8&#160;</span> For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue and their doings <span class='add'>are</span> against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to provoke the eyes of his glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_9">9&#160;</span>¶ The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they declare their sin as <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sodom, they hide <span class='add'>it</span> not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_10">10&#160;</span> Say ye to the righteous, that <span class='add'>it shall be</span> well <span class='add'>with him:</span> for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_11">11&#160;</span> Woe unto the wicked! <span class='add'>it shall be</span> ill <span class='add'>with him:</span> for the reward of his hands shall be <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>given him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>As for</span> my people, children <span class='add'>are</span> their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>they which lead thee cause <span class='add'>thee</span> to err, and <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy the way of thy paths.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_13">13&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_14">14&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor <span class='add'>is</span> in your houses.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_15">15&#160;</span>What mean ye <span class='add'>that</span> ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wanton eyes, walking and <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mincing <span class='add'>as</span> they go, and making a tinkling with their feet:
<span class="verse" id="IS3_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discover their secret parts.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_18">18&#160;</span> In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of <span class='add'>their</span> tinkling ornaments <span class='add'>about their feet</span>, and <span class='add'>their</span> <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cauls, and <span class='add'>their</span> round tires like the moon,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_19">19&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>chains, and the bracelets, and the <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mufflers,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_20">20&#160;</span> The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tablets, and the earrings,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_21">21&#160;</span> The rings, and nose jewels,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_22">22&#160;</span> The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins,
<span class="verse" id="IS3_23">23&#160;</span> The glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the vails.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_24">24&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; <span class='add'>and</span> burning instead of beauty.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_25">25&#160;</span> Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mighty in the war.
<span class="verse" id="IS3_26">26&#160;</span> And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she <span class='add'>being</span> <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>desolate shall sit upon the ground.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS4_1">1&#160;</span> And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>let us be called by thy name, <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to take away our reproach.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS4_2">2&#160;</span> In that day shall the branch of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth <span class='add'>shall be</span> excellent and comely <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for them that are escaped of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS4_3">3&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that he that is</span> left in Zion, and <span class='add'>he that</span> remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, <span class='add'>even</span> every one that is written <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>among the living in Jerusalem:
<span class="verse" id="IS4_4">4&#160;</span> When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning.
<span class="verse" id="IS4_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upon all the glory <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a defence.
<span class="verse" id="IS4_6">6&#160;</span> And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_1">1&#160;</span> Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>vineyard in <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a very fruitful hill:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_2">2&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_3">3&#160;</span> And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_4">4&#160;</span> What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?
<span class="verse" id="IS5_5">5&#160;</span> And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; <span class='add'>and</span> break down the wall thereof, and it shall be <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>trodden down:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_6">6&#160;</span> And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_7">7&#160;</span> For the vineyard of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> the house of Israel, and the men of Judah <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but behold <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Woe unto them that join <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>house to house, <span class='add'>that</span> lay field to field, till <span class='add'>there be</span> no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!
<span class="verse" id="IS5_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> In mine ears <span class='add'>said</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, <span class='add'>even</span> great and fair, without inhabitant.<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_10">10&#160;</span> Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, <span class='add'>that</span> they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, <span class='add'>till</span> wine <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>inflame them!
<span class="verse" id="IS5_12">12&#160;</span> And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither consider the operation of his hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because <span class='add'>they have</span> no knowledge: and <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their honourable men <span class='add'>are</span> famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_15">15&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_16">16&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_17">17&#160;</span> Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_18">18&#160;</span> Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_19">19&#160;</span> That say, Let him make speed, <span class='add'>and</span> hasten his work, that we may see <span class='add'>it:</span> and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know <span class='add'>it</span>! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Woe unto them <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!
<span class="verse" id="IS5_21">21&#160;</span> Woe unto <span class='add'>them that are</span> <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wise in their own eyes, and prudent <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in their own sight!
<span class="verse" id="IS5_22">22&#160;</span> Woe unto <span class='add'>them that are</span> mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_23">23&#160;</span> Which <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him!
<span class="verse" id="IS5_24">24&#160;</span> Therefore as <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, <span class='add'>so</span> their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore is the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>torn in the midst of the streets. <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand <span class='add'>is</span> stretched out still.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_27">27&#160;</span> None shall be weary nor stumble among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_28">28&#160;</span> Whose arrows <span class='add'>are</span> sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses’ hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind:
<span class="verse" id="IS5_29">29&#160;</span> Their roaring <span class='add'>shall be</span> like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry <span class='add'>it</span> away safe, and none shall deliver <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS5_30">30&#160;</span> And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of the sea: and if <span class='add'>one</span> look unto the land, behold darkness <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sorrow, <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_1">1&#160;</span> In the year that king Uzziah died I <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his train filled the temple.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_2">2&#160;</span> Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_3">3&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>one cried unto another, and said, <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Holy, holy, holy, <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the whole earth <span class='add'>is</span> full of his glory.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_4">4&#160;</span> And the posts of the <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>door moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then said I, Woe <span class='add'>is</span> me! for I am <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>undone; because I <span class='add'>am</span> a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_6">6&#160;</span> Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>having a live coal in his hand, <span class='add'>which</span> he had taken with the tongs from off the altar:
<span class="verse" id="IS6_7">7&#160;</span> And he <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>laid <span class='add'>it</span> upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_8">8&#160;</span> Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>us? Then <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>said I, <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Here <span class='add'>am</span> I; send me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And he said, Go, and tell this people, <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hear ye <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_10">10&#160;</span> Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.
<span class="verse" id="IS6_11">11&#160;</span> Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>utterly desolate,
<span class="verse" id="IS6_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have removed men far away, and <span class='add'>there be</span> a great forsaking in the midst of the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_13">13&#160;</span>¶ But yet in it <span class='add'>shall be</span> a tenth, <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and <span class='add'>it</span> shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>substance <span class='add'>is</span> in them, when they cast <span class='add'>their leaves: so</span> the holy seed <span class='add'>shall be</span> the substance thereof.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the days of <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, <span class='add'>that</span> Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_2">2&#160;</span> And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_3">3&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>conduit of the upper pool in the <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>highway of the fuller’s field;
<span class="verse" id="IS7_4">4&#160;</span> And say unto him, Take heed, and be quiet; fear not, <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_5">5&#160;</span> Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying,
<span class="verse" id="IS7_6">6&#160;</span> Let us go up against Judah, and <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, <span class='add'>even</span> the son of Tabeal:
<span class="verse" id="IS7_7">7&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, It shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_8">8&#160;</span> For the head of Syria <span class='add'>is</span> Damascus, and the head of Damascus <span class='add'>is</span> Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that it be not a people.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_9">9&#160;</span> And the head of Ephraim <span class='add'>is</span> Samaria, and the head of Samaria <span class='add'>is</span> Remaliah’s son. <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake again unto Ahaz, saying,<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_11">11&#160;</span> Ask thee a sign of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God; <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_12">12&#160;</span> But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_13">13&#160;</span> And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; <span class='add'>Is it</span> a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?
<span class="verse" id="IS7_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall call his name Immanuel.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_15">15&#160;</span> Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_16">16&#160;</span> For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_17">17&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father’s house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; <span class='add'>even</span> the king of Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_18">18&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall hiss for the fly that <span class='add'>is</span> in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_19">19&#160;</span> And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon all <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bushes.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_20">20&#160;</span> In the same day shall the Lord shave with a <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>razor that is hired, <span class='add'>namely</span>, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_21">21&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep;
<span class="verse" id="IS7_22">22&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk <span class='add'>that</span> they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the land.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_23">23&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall <span class='add'>even</span> be for briers and thorns.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_24">24&#160;</span> With arrows and with bows shall <span class='add'>men</span> come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns.
<span class="verse" id="IS7_25">25&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>on</span> all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man’s pen concerning <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_2">2&#160;</span> And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_3">3&#160;</span> And I <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_4">4&#160;</span> For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_5">5&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake also unto me again, saying,
<span class="verse" id="IS8_6">6&#160;</span> Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah’s son;
<span class="verse" id="IS8_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, <span class='add'>even</span> the king of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and go over all his banks:
<span class="verse" id="IS8_8">8&#160;</span> And he shall pass through Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach <span class='add'>even</span> to the neck; and <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Associate yourselves, O ye people, <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_10">10&#160;</span> Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God <span class='add'>is</span> with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_11">11&#160;</span>¶ For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake thus to me <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying,
<span class="verse" id="IS8_12">12&#160;</span> Say ye not, A confederacy, to all <span class='add'>them to</span> whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_13">13&#160;</span> Sanctify the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts himself; and <span class='add'>let</span> him <span class='add'>be</span> your fear, and <span class='add'>let</span> him <span class='add'>be</span> your dread.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_14">14&#160;</span> And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_15">15&#160;</span> And many among them shall <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stumble, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_16">16&#160;</span> Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_17">17&#160;</span> And I will wait upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, I and the children whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given me <span class='add'>are</span> for signs and for wonders in Israel from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, which dwelleth in mount Zion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?
<span class="verse" id="IS8_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, <span class='add'>it is</span> because <span class='add'>there is</span> <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>no light in them.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_21">21&#160;</span> And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward.
<span class="verse" id="IS8_22">22&#160;</span> And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and <span class='add'>they shall be</span> driven to darkness.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_1">1&#160;</span> Nevertheless the dimness <span class='add'>shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> such as <span class='add'>was</span> in her vexation, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict <span class='add'>her by</span> the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of the nations.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_3">3&#160;</span> Thou hast multiplied the nation, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>not increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, <span class='add'>and</span> as <span class='add'>men</span> rejoice when they divide the spoil.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Midian.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For every battle of the warrior <span class='add'>is</span> with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>but <span class='add'>this</span> shall be with burning <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fuel of fire.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_6">6&#160;</span> For unto us a child is born, unto us a <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_7">7&#160;</span> Of the increase of <span class='add'>his</span> government and peace <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>there shall be</span> no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>zeal of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts will perform this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_8">8&#160;</span>¶ The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_9">9&#160;</span> And all the people shall know, <span class='add'>even</span> Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart,
<span class="verse" id="IS9_10">10&#160;</span> The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we will change <span class='add'>them into</span> cedars.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>join his enemies together;
<span class="verse" id="IS9_12">12&#160;</span> The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with open mouth. <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand <span class='add'>is</span> stretched out still.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_13">13&#160;</span>¶ For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_15">15&#160;</span> The ancient and honourable, he <span class='add'>is</span> the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he <span class='add'>is</span> the tail.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_16">16&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the leaders of this people cause <span class='add'>them</span> to err; and <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>they that are</span> led of them <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one <span class='add'>is</span> an hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand <span class='add'>is</span> stretched out still.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_18">18&#160;</span>¶ For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shall mount up <span class='add'>like</span> the lifting up of smoke.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_19">19&#160;</span> Through the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shall be as the <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his brother.
<span class="verse" id="IS9_20">20&#160;</span> And he shall <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm:
<span class="verse" id="IS9_21">21&#160;</span> Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: <span class='add'>and</span> they together <span class='add'>shall be</span> against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand <span class='add'>is</span> stretched out still.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_1">1&#160;</span> Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that write grievousness <span class='add'>which</span> they have prescribed;
<span class="verse" id="IS10_2">2&#160;</span> To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and <span class='add'>that</span> they may rob the fatherless!
<span class="verse" id="IS10_3">3&#160;</span> And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation <span class='add'>which</span> shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory?
<span class="verse" id="IS10_4">4&#160;</span> Without me they shall bow down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand <span class='add'>is</span> stretched out still. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>O <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the staff in their hand is mine indignation.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_6">6&#160;</span> I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to tread them down like the mire of the streets.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_7">7&#160;</span> Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but <span class='add'>it is</span> in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For he saith, <span class='add'>Are</span> not my princes altogether kings?
<span class="verse" id="IS10_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not Calno as Carchemish? <span class='add'>is</span> not Hamath as Arpad? <span class='add'>is</span> not Samaria as Damascus?
<span class="verse" id="IS10_10">10&#160;</span> As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria;
<span class="verse" id="IS10_11">11&#160;</span> Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?
<span class="verse" id="IS10_12">12&#160;</span>Wherefore it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when the Lord hath performed his whole work <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punish the fruit <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_13">13&#160;</span> For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done <span class='add'>it</span>, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>like a valiant <span class='add'>man:</span>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_14">14&#160;</span> And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs <span class='add'>that are</span> left, have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_15">15&#160;</span> Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? <span class='add'>or</span> shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as if the rod should shake <span class='add'>itself</span> against them that lift it up, <span class='add'>or</span> as if the staff should lift up <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>itself, as if it were</span> no wood.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_17">17&#160;</span> And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day;
<span class="verse" id="IS10_18">18&#160;</span> And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>both soul and body: and they shall be as when a standardbearer fainteth.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_19">19&#160;</span> And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>few, that a child may write them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_21">21&#160;</span> The remnant shall return, <span class='add'>even</span> the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, <span class='add'>yet</span> a remnant <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of them shall return: <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the consumption decreed shall overflow <a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts shall make a consumption, even determined, in the midst of all the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with a rod, <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_25">25&#160;</span> For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in their destruction.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_26">26&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according to the slaughter of <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Midian at the rock of Oreb: and <span class='add'>as</span> his rod <span class='add'>was</span> upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_27">27&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> his burden <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_28">28&#160;</span> He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his carriages:
<span class="verse" id="IS10_29">29&#160;</span> They are gone over the passage: they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_31">31&#160;</span> Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flee.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_32">32&#160;</span> As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand <span class='add'>against</span> the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_33">33&#160;</span> Behold, the Lord, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature <span class='add'>shall be</span> hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled.
<span class="verse" id="IS10_34">34&#160;</span> And he shall cut down the thickets of the <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by a mighty one.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_1">1&#160;</span> And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:
<span class="verse" id="IS11_2">2&#160;</span> And the spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>;
<span class="verse" id="IS11_3">3&#160;</span> And shall make him of <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>quick understanding in the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:
<span class="verse" id="IS11_4">4&#160;</span> But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_5">5&#160;</span> And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_7">7&#160;</span> And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_8">8&#160;</span> And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cockatrice’ den.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_9">9&#160;</span> They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as the waters cover the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>glorious.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_11">11&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_12">12&#160;</span> And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>corners of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_13">13&#160;</span> The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_14">14&#160;</span> But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west; they shall spoil <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>them of the east together: <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and the children of Ammon shall obey them.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make <span class='add'>men</span> go over <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dryshod.
<span class="verse" id="IS11_16">16&#160;</span> And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS12_1">1&#160;</span> And in that day thou shalt say, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.
<span class="verse" id="IS12_2">2&#160;</span> Behold, God <span class='add'>is</span> my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='nd'>JEHOVAH</span> <span class='add'>is</span> my <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>strength and <span class='add'>my</span> song; he also is become my salvation.
<span class="verse" id="IS12_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS12_4">4&#160;</span> And in that day shall ye say, <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted.
<span class="verse" id="IS12_5">5&#160;</span> Sing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for he hath done excellent things: this <span class='add'>is</span> known in all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS12_6">6&#160;</span> Cry out and shout, thou <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>inhabitant of Zion: for great <span class='add'>is</span> the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_2">2&#160;</span> Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_3">3&#160;</span> I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty ones for mine anger, <span class='add'>even</span> them that rejoice in my highness.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_4">4&#160;</span> The noise of a multitude in the mountains, <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_5">5&#160;</span> They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, <span class='add'>even</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Howl ye; for the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> at hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore shall all hands <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>be faint, and every man’s heart shall melt:
<span class="verse" id="IS13_8">8&#160;</span> And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be amazed <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>one at another; their faces <span class='add'>shall be as</span> <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>flames.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_10">10&#160;</span> For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not give their light: the sun shall be <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_11">11&#160;</span> And I will punish the world for <span class='add'>their</span> evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_12">12&#160;</span> I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_14">14&#160;</span> And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every one into his own land.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_15">15&#160;</span> Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is joined <span class='add'>unto them</span> shall fall by the sword.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_16">16&#160;</span> Their children also shall be <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_17">17&#160;</span> Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard silver; and <span class='add'>as for</span> gold, they shall not delight in it.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Their</span> bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees’ excellency, shall be <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as when God overthrew <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sodom and Gomorrah.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_20">20&#160;</span> It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_21">21&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses shall be full of <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>doleful creatures; and <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.
<span class="verse" id="IS13_22">22&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>desolate houses, and dragons in <span class='add'>their</span> pleasant palaces: and her time <span class='add'>is</span> near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_1">1&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_2">2&#160;</span> And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_3">3&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in the day that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_4">4&#160;</span>¶ That thou shalt take up this <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>golden city ceased!
<span class="verse" id="IS14_5">5&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath broken the staff of the wicked, <span class='add'>and</span> the sceptre of the rulers.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_6">6&#160;</span> He who smote the people in wrath with <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, <span class='add'>and</span> none hindereth.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_7">7&#160;</span> The whole earth is at rest, <span class='add'>and</span> is quiet: they break forth into singing.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_8">8&#160;</span> Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, <span class='add'>and</span> the cedars of Lebanon, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet <span class='add'>thee</span> at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee, <span class='add'>even</span> all the <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_10">10&#160;</span> All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us?
<span class="verse" id="IS14_11">11&#160;</span> Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, <span class='add'>and</span> the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_12">12&#160;</span> How art thou fallen from heaven, <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>O Lucifer, son of the morning! <span class='add'>how</span> art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!
<span class="verse" id="IS14_13">13&#160;</span> For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north:
<span class="verse" id="IS14_14">14&#160;</span> I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_15">15&#160;</span> Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_16">16&#160;</span> They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, <span class='add'>and</span> consider thee, <span class='add'>saying, Is</span> this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;
<span class="verse" id="IS14_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> made the world as a wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>opened not the house of his prisoners?
<span class="verse" id="IS14_18">18&#160;</span> All the kings of the nations, <span class='add'>even</span> all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_19">19&#160;</span> But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, <span class='add'>and as</span> the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden under feet.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_20">20&#160;</span> Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, <span class='add'>and</span> slain thy people: <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the seed of evildoers shall never be renowned.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_21">21&#160;</span> Prepare slaughter for his children <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_22">22&#160;</span> For I will rise up against them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_23">23&#160;</span> I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_24">24&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, <span class='add'>so</span> shall it stand:
<span class="verse" id="IS14_25">25&#160;</span> That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_26">26&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and this <span class='add'>is</span> the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_27">27&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>purposed, and who shall disannul <span class='add'>it</span>? and his hand <span class='add'>is</span> stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
<span class="verse" id="IS14_28">28&#160;</span> In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent’s root shall come forth a <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cockatrice, and his fruit <span class='add'>shall be</span> a fiery flying serpent.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_30">30&#160;</span> And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_31">31&#160;</span> Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, <span class='add'>art</span> dissolved: for there shall come from the north a smoke, and <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>none <span class='add'>shall be</span> alone in his <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>appointed times.
<span class="verse" id="IS14_32">32&#160;</span>What shall <span class='add'>one</span> then answer the messengers of the nation? That <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trust in it.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS15_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, <span class='add'>and</span> brought to silence;
<span class="verse" id="IS15_2">2&#160;</span> He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>on all their heads <span class='add'>shall be</span> baldness, <span class='add'>and</span> every beard cut off.
<span class="verse" id="IS15_3">3&#160;</span> In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl, <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>weeping abundantly.
<span class="verse" id="IS15_4">4&#160;</span> And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard <span class='add'>even</span> unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; his life shall be grievous unto him.
<span class="verse" id="IS15_5">5&#160;</span> My heart shall cry out for Moab; <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his fugitives <span class='add'>shall flee</span> unto Zoar, an <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destruction.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS15_6">6&#160;</span> For the waters of Nimrim shall be <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>desolate: for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.
<span class="verse" id="IS15_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brook of the willows.
<span class="verse" id="IS15_8">8&#160;</span> For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beer-elim.
<span class="verse" id="IS15_9">9&#160;</span> For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_1">1&#160;</span> Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Sela to the wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_2">2&#160;</span>For it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span>, as a wandering bird <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cast out of the nest, <span class='add'>so</span> the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_4">4&#160;</span> Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler: for the <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>extortioner is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the oppressors are consumed out of the land.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_5">5&#160;</span> And in mercy <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall the throne be <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>established: and he shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_6">6&#160;</span>¶ We have heard of the <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pride of Moab; <span class='add'>he is</span> very proud: <span class='add'>even</span> of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: <span class='add'>but</span> his lies <span class='add'>shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> so.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore shall Moab <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mourn; surely <span class='add'>they are</span> stricken.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_8">8&#160;</span> For the fields of Heshbon languish, <span class='add'>and</span> the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof, they are come <span class='add'>even</span> unto Jazer, they wandered <span class='add'>through</span> the wilderness: her branches are <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stretched out, they are gone over the sea.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in <span class='add'>their</span> presses; I have made <span class='add'>their vintage</span> shouting to cease.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_11">11&#160;</span> Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kir-haresh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_13">13&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the word that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken concerning Moab since that time.
<span class="verse" id="IS16_14">14&#160;</span> But now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned, with all that great multitude; and the remnant <span class='add'>shall be</span> very small <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>feeble.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from <span class='add'>being</span> a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_2">2&#160;</span> The cities of Aroer <span class='add'>are</span> forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make <span class='add'>them</span> afraid.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_3">3&#160;</span> The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_4">4&#160;</span> And in that day it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_5">5&#160;</span> And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree, two <span class='add'>or</span> three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four <span class='add'>or</span> five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_7">7&#160;</span> At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_8">8&#160;</span> And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shall respect <span class='add'>that</span> which his fingers have made, either the groves, or the <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>images.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_9">9&#160;</span>¶ In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of Israel: and there shall be desolation.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_10">10&#160;</span> Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips:
<span class="verse" id="IS17_11">11&#160;</span> In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish: <span class='add'>but</span> the harvest <span class='add'>shall be</span> a <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Woe to the <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>multitude of many people, <span class='add'>which</span> make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, <span class='add'>that</span> make a rushing like the rushing of <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mighty waters!
<span class="verse" id="IS17_13">13&#160;</span> The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters: but <span class='add'>God</span> shall rebuke them, and they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a rolling thing before the whirlwind.
<span class="verse" id="IS17_14">14&#160;</span> And behold at eveningtide trouble; <span class='add'>and</span> before the morning he <span class='add'>is</span> not. This <span class='add'>is</span> the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS18_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which <span class='add'>is</span> beyond the rivers of Ethiopia:
<span class="verse" id="IS18_2">2&#160;</span> That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a nation meted out and trodden down, <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>whose land the rivers have spoiled!
<span class="verse" id="IS18_3">3&#160;</span> All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.
<span class="verse" id="IS18_4">4&#160;</span> For so the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upon herbs, <span class='add'>and</span> like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
<span class="verse" id="IS18_5">5&#160;</span> For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and take away <span class='add'>and</span> cut down the branches.
<span class="verse" id="IS18_6">6&#160;</span> They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS18_7">7&#160;</span>¶ In that time shall the present be brought unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts of a people <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the mount Zion.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of Egypt. Behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_2">2&#160;</span> And I will <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, <span class='add'>and</span> kingdom against kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_3">3&#160;</span> And the spirit of Egypt <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall fail in the midst thereof; and I will <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_4">4&#160;</span> And the Egyptians will I <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_5">5&#160;</span> And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_6">6&#160;</span> And they shall turn the rivers far away; <span class='add'>and</span> the brooks of defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall wither.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_7">7&#160;</span> The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and be no <span class='add'>more</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_8">8&#160;</span> The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shall languish.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_9">9&#160;</span> Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>networks, shall be confounded.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_10">10&#160;</span> And they shall be broken in the <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>purposes thereof, all that make sluices <span class='add'>and</span> ponds <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for fish.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Surely the princes of Zoan <span class='add'>are</span> fools, the counsel of the wise counsellors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I <span class='add'>am</span> the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?
<span class="verse" id="IS19_12">12&#160;</span> Where <span class='add'>are</span> they? where <span class='add'>are</span> thy wise <span class='add'>men</span>? and let them tell thee now, and let them know what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_13">13&#160;</span> The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, <span class='add'>even <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they that are</span> the stay of the tribes thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_14">14&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath mingled <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken <span class='add'>man</span> staggereth in his vomit.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_15">15&#160;</span>Neither shall there be <span class='add'>any</span> work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_16">16&#160;</span> In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, which he shaketh over it.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_17">17&#160;</span> And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, which he hath determined against it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_18">18&#160;</span>¶ In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the language of Canaan, and swear to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; one shall be called, The city <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of destruction.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_19">19&#160;</span> In that day shall there be an altar to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_20">20&#160;</span> And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shall deliver them.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shall vow a vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and perform <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_22">22&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal <span class='add'>it:</span> and they shall return <span class='add'>even</span> to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he shall be intreated of them, and shall heal them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_23">23&#160;</span>¶ In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.
<span class="verse" id="IS19_24">24&#160;</span> In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, <span class='add'>even</span> a blessing in the midst of the land:
<span class="verse" id="IS19_25">25&#160;</span> Whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS20_1">1&#160;</span> In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it;
<span class="verse" id="IS20_2">2&#160;</span> At the same time spake the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.
<span class="verse" id="IS20_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefoot three years <span class='add'>for</span> a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia;
<span class="verse" id="IS20_4">4&#160;</span> So shall the king of Assyria lead away <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with <span class='add'>their</span> buttocks uncovered, to the <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shame of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="IS20_5">5&#160;</span> And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory.
<span class="verse" id="IS20_6">6&#160;</span> And the inhabitant of this <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>isle shall say in that day, Behold, such <span class='add'>is</span> our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass through; <span class='add'>so</span> it cometh from the desert, from a terrible land.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_2">2&#160;</span> A <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore are my loins filled with pain: pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at the hearing <span class='add'>of it;</span> I was dismayed at the seeing <span class='add'>of it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my pleasure hath he <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>turned into fear unto me.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_5">5&#160;</span> Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, <span class='add'>and</span> anoint the shield.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_6">6&#160;</span> For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_7">7&#160;</span> And he saw a chariot <span class='add'>with</span> a couple of horsemen, a chariot of asses, <span class='add'>and</span> a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much heed:
<span class="verse" id="IS21_8">8&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continually upon the <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>whole nights:
<span class="verse" id="IS21_9">9&#160;</span> And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, <span class='add'>with</span> a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_10">10&#160;</span> O my threshing, and the <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>corn of my floor: that which I have heard of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_11">11&#160;</span>¶ The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?
<span class="verse" id="IS21_12">12&#160;</span> The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will enquire, enquire ye: return, come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_13">13&#160;</span>¶ The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_14">14&#160;</span> The inhabitants of the land of Tema <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_15">15&#160;</span> For they fled <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.
<span class="verse" id="IS21_16">16&#160;</span> For thus hath the Lord said unto me, Within a year, according to the years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail:
<span class="verse" id="IS21_17">17&#160;</span> And the residue of the number of <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, that thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?
<span class="verse" id="IS22_2">2&#160;</span> Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous city, a joyous city: thy slain <span class='add'>men are</span> not slain with the sword, nor dead in battle.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_3">3&#160;</span> All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by the archers: all that are found in thee are bound together, <span class='add'>which</span> have fled from far.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore said I, <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Look away from me; <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I will weep bitterly, labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_5">5&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it is</span> a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_6">6&#160;</span> And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men <span class='add'>and</span> horsemen, and Kir <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>uncovered the shield.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_7">7&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>at the gate.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst look in that day to the armour of the house of the forest.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_9">9&#160;</span> Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_10">10&#160;</span> And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_11">11&#160;</span> Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_12">12&#160;</span> And in that day did the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth:
<span class="verse" id="IS22_13">13&#160;</span> And behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall die.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_14">14&#160;</span> And it was revealed in mine ears by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts, Go, get thee unto this treasurer, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Shebna, which <span class='add'>is</span> over the house, <span class='add'>and say</span>,
<span class="verse" id="IS22_16">16&#160;</span> What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>as</span> he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, <span class='add'>and</span> that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?
<span class="verse" id="IS22_17">17&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will carry thee away with <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_18">18&#160;</span> He will surely violently turn and toss thee <span class='add'>like</span> a ball into a <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory <span class='add'>shall be</span> the shame of thy lord’s house.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_19">19&#160;</span> And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall he pull thee down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah:
<span class="verse" id="IS22_21">21&#160;</span> And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_22">22&#160;</span> And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none shall open.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_23">23&#160;</span> And I will fasten him <span class='add'>as</span> a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_24">24&#160;</span> And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father’s house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>vessels of flagons.
<span class="verse" id="IS22_25">25&#160;</span> In that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, shall the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and the burden that <span class='add'>was</span> upon it shall be cut off: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS23_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_2">2&#160;</span> Be <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>still, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_3">3&#160;</span> And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, <span class='add'>is</span> her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_4">4&#160;</span> Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, <span class='add'>even</span> the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, <span class='add'>nor</span> bring up virgins.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_5">5&#160;</span> As at the report concerning Egypt, <span class='add'>so</span> shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_6">6&#160;</span> Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> this your joyous <span class='add'>city</span>, whose antiquity <span class='add'>is</span> of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>afar off to sojourn.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_8">8&#160;</span> Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning <span class='add'>city</span>, whose merchants <span class='add'>are</span> princes, whose traffickers <span class='add'>are</span> the honourable of the earth?
<span class="verse" id="IS23_9">9&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath purposed it, <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to stain the pride of all glory, <span class='add'>and</span> to bring into contempt all the honourable of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_10">10&#160;</span> Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish: <span class='add'>there is</span> no more <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>strength.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_11">11&#160;</span> He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given a commandment <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>against <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the merchant <span class='add'>city</span>, to destroy the <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>strong holds thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_13">13&#160;</span> Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people was not, <span class='add'>till</span> the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; <span class='add'>and</span> he brought it to ruin.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_14">14&#160;</span> Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS23_15">15&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king: after the end of seventy years <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall Tyre sing as an harlot.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_16">16&#160;</span> Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS23_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS23_18">18&#160;</span> And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to eat sufficiently, and for <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>durable clothing.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS24_1">1&#160;</span> Behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_2">2&#160;</span> And it shall be, as with the people, so with the <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_3">3&#160;</span> The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken this word.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_4">4&#160;</span> The earth mourneth <span class='add'>and</span> fadeth away, the world languisheth <span class='add'>and</span> fadeth away, <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the haughty people of the earth do languish.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_5">5&#160;</span> The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_7">7&#160;</span> The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted do sigh.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_8">8&#160;</span> The mirth <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_9">9&#160;</span> They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_10">10&#160;</span> The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that no man may come in.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_12">12&#160;</span> In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS24_13">13&#160;</span>¶ When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people, <span class='add'>there shall be</span> as the shaking of an olive tree, <span class='add'>and</span> as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_14">14&#160;</span> They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, they shall cry aloud from the sea.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_15">15&#160;</span> Wherefore glorify ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fires, <span class='add'>even</span> the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel in the isles of the sea.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS24_16">16&#160;</span>¶ From the <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, <span class='add'>even</span> glory to the righteous. But I said, <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Fear, and the pit, and the snare, <span class='add'>are</span> upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_18">18&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> he who fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_19">19&#160;</span> The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved exceedingly.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_20">20&#160;</span> The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_21">21&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punish the host of the high ones <span class='add'>that are</span> on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_22">22&#160;</span> And they shall be gathered together, <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>as</span> prisoners are gathered in the <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days shall they be <a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>visited.
<span class="verse" id="IS24_23">23&#160;</span> Then the <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>before his ancients gloriously.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS25_1">1&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou <span class='add'>art</span> my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful <span class='add'>things; thy</span> counsels of old <span class='add'>are</span> faithfulness <span class='add'>and</span> truth.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_2">2&#160;</span> For thou hast made of a city an heap; <span class='add'>of</span> a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_4">4&#160;</span> For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones <span class='add'>is</span> as a storm <span class='add'>against</span> the wall.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_5">5&#160;</span> Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place; <span class='add'>even</span> the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS25_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And in this mountain shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_7">7&#160;</span> And he will <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy in this mountain the face of the covering <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_8">8&#160;</span> He will <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>swallow up death in victory; and the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS25_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this <span class='add'>is</span> our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_10">10&#160;</span> For in this mountain shall the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rest, and Moab shall be <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trodden down under him, even as straw is <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trodden down for the dunghill.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_11">11&#160;</span> And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth <span class='add'>his hands</span> to swim: and he shall bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands.
<span class="verse" id="IS25_12">12&#160;</span> And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring down, lay low, <span class='add'>and</span> bring to the ground, <span class='add'>even</span> to the dust.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_1">1&#160;</span> In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong city; salvation will <span class='add'>God</span> appoint <span class='add'>for</span> walls and bulwarks.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_2">2&#160;</span> Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>truth may enter in.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_3">3&#160;</span> Thou wilt keep <span class='add'>him</span> in <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>perfect peace, <span class='add'>whose</span> <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mind <span class='add'>is</span> stayed <span class='add'>on thee:</span> because he trusteth in thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_4">4&#160;</span> Trust ye in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for ever: for in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='nd'>JEHOVAH</span> <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>everlasting strength:</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_5">5&#160;</span>¶ For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, <span class='add'>even</span> to the ground; he bringeth it <span class='add'>even</span> to the dust.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_6">6&#160;</span> The foot shall tread it down, <span class='add'>even</span> the feet of the poor, <span class='add'>and</span> the steps of the needy.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_7">7&#160;</span> The way of the just <span class='add'>is</span> uprightness: thou, most upright, dost weigh the path of the just.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_8">8&#160;</span> Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, have we waited for thee; the desire of <span class='add'>our</span> soul <span class='add'>is</span> to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_9">9&#160;</span> With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments <span class='add'>are</span> in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_10">10&#160;</span> Let favour be shewed to the wicked, <span class='add'>yet</span> will he not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>when</span> thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: <span class='add'>but</span> they shall see, and be ashamed for <span class='add'>their</span> envy <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our works <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in us.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_13">13&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, <span class='add'>other</span> lords beside thee have had dominion over us: <span class='add'>but</span> by thee only will we make mention of thy name.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They are</span> dead, they shall not live; <span class='add'>they are</span> deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_15">15&#160;</span> Thou hast increased the nation, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed <span class='add'>it</span> far <span class='add'>unto</span> all the ends of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prayer <span class='add'>when</span> thy chastening <span class='add'>was</span> upon them.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_17">17&#160;</span> Like as a woman with child, <span class='add'>that</span> draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, <span class='add'>and</span> crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in thy sight, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_18">18&#160;</span> We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_19">19&#160;</span> Thy dead <span class='add'>men</span> shall live, <span class='add'>together with</span> my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew <span class='add'>is as</span> the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.
<span class="verse" id="IS26_21">21&#160;</span> For, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood, and shall no more cover her slain.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_1">1&#160;</span> In that day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>piercing serpent, even leviathan that crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that <span class='add'>is</span> in the sea.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_2">2&#160;</span> In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_3">3&#160;</span> I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest <span class='add'>any</span> hurt it, I will keep it night and day.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_4">4&#160;</span> Fury <span class='add'>is</span> not in me: who would set the briers <span class='add'>and</span> thorns against me in battle? I would <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>go through them, I would burn them together.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_5">5&#160;</span> Or let him take hold of my strength, <span class='add'>that</span> he may make peace with me; <span class='add'>and</span> he shall make peace with me.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_6">6&#160;</span> He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Hath he smitten him, <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as he smote those that smote him? <span class='add'>or</span> is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?
<span class="verse" id="IS27_8">8&#160;</span> In measure, <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: <a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_9">9&#160;</span> By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this <span class='add'>is</span> all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>images shall not stand up.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_10">10&#160;</span> Yet the defenced city <span class='add'>shall be</span> desolate, <span class='add'>and</span> the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_11">11&#160;</span> When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off: the women come, <span class='add'>and</span> set them on fire: for it <span class='add'>is</span> a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no favour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall beat off from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS27_13">13&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall worship the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the holy mount at Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty <span class='add'>is</span> a fading flower, which <span class='add'>are</span> on the head of the fat valleys of them that are <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>overcome with wine!
<span class="verse" id="IS28_2">2&#160;</span> Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, <span class='add'>which</span> as a tempest of hail <span class='add'>and</span> a destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_3">3&#160;</span> The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden <a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>under feet:
<span class="verse" id="IS28_4">4&#160;</span> And the glorious beauty, which <span class='add'>is</span> on the head of the fat valley, shall be a fading flower, <span class='add'>and</span> as the hasty fruit before the summer; which <span class='add'>when</span> he that looketh upon it <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>seeth, while it is yet in his hand he <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>eateth it up.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_5">5&#160;</span>¶ In that day shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people,
<span class="verse" id="IS28_6">6&#160;</span> And for a spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to the gate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_7">7&#160;</span>¶ But they also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble <span class='add'>in</span> judgment.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_8">8&#160;</span> For all tables are full of vomit <span class='add'>and</span> filthiness, <span class='add'>so that there is</span> no place <span class='add'>clean</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand <a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>doctrine? <span class='add'>them that are</span> weaned from the milk, <span class='add'>and</span> drawn from the breasts.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_10">10&#160;</span> For precept <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>must be</span> upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, <span class='add'>and</span> there a little:
<span class="verse" id="IS28_11">11&#160;</span> For with <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stammering lips and another tongue <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>will he speak to this people.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_12">12&#160;</span> To whom he said, This <span class='add'>is</span> the rest <span class='add'>wherewith</span> ye may cause the weary to rest; and this <span class='add'>is</span> the refreshing: yet they would not hear.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_13">13&#160;</span> But the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was unto them precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, <span class='add'>and</span> there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye scornful men, that rule this people which <span class='add'>is</span> in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_15">15&#160;</span> Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner <span class='add'>stone</span>, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_17">17&#160;</span> Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>trodden down by it.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_19">19&#160;</span> From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a vexation only <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>to</span> understand the report.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_20">20&#160;</span> For the bed is shorter than that <span class='add'>a man</span> can stretch himself <span class='add'>on it:</span> and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself <span class='add'>in it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_21">21&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall rise up as <span class='add'>in</span> mount <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Perazim, he shall be wroth as <span class='add'>in</span> the valley of <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_22">22&#160;</span> Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_24">24&#160;</span> Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground?
<span class="verse" id="IS28_25">25&#160;</span> When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rie in their <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>place?
<span class="verse" id="IS28_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For his God doth instruct him to discretion, <span class='add'>and</span> doth teach him.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_27">27&#160;</span> For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_28">28&#160;</span> Bread <span class='add'>corn</span> is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break <span class='add'>it with</span> the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it <span class='add'>with</span> his horsemen.
<span class="verse" id="IS28_29">29&#160;</span> This also cometh forth from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, <span class='add'>which</span> is wonderful in counsel, <span class='add'>and</span> excellent in working.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_1">1&#160;</span> Woe <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to Ariel, to Ariel, <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the city <span class='add'>where</span> David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>kill sacrifices.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_2">2&#160;</span> Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and sorrow: and it shall be unto me as Ariel.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_3">3&#160;</span> And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_4">4&#160;</span> And thou shalt be brought down, <span class='add'>and</span> shalt speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy speech shall <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whisper out of the dust.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_5">5&#160;</span> Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones <span class='add'>shall be</span> as chaff that passeth away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_6">6&#160;</span> Thou shalt be visited of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_8">8&#160;</span> It shall even be as when an hungry <span class='add'>man</span> dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, <span class='add'>he is</span> faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount Zion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Stay yourselves, and wonder; <a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_10">10&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rulers, the seers hath he covered.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_11">11&#160;</span> And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>book that is sealed, which <span class='add'>men</span> deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it <span class='add'>is</span> sealed:
<span class="verse" id="IS29_12">12&#160;</span> And the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore the Lord said, <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Forasmuch as this people draw near <span class='add'>me</span> with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:
<span class="verse" id="IS29_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I will proceed to do a marvellous work among this people, <span class='add'>even</span> a marvellous work and a wonder: <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for the wisdom of their wise <span class='add'>men</span> shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent <span class='add'>men</span> shall be hid.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_15">15&#160;</span> Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and their works are in the dark, and they say, <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?
<span class="verse" id="IS29_16">16&#160;</span> Surely your turning of things upside down shall be esteemed as the potter’s clay: for shall the <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_19">19&#160;</span> The meek also <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall increase <span class='add'>their</span> joy in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_20">20&#160;</span> For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off:
<span class="verse" id="IS29_21">21&#160;</span> That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_23">23&#160;</span> But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS29_24">24&#160;</span> They also that erred in spirit <a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to the rebellious children, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_2">2&#160;</span> That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt!
<span class="verse" id="IS30_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt <span class='add'>your</span> confusion.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_4">4&#160;</span> For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_5">5&#160;</span> They were all ashamed of a people <span class='add'>that</span> could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_6">6&#160;</span> The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence <span class='add'>come</span> the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a people <span class='add'>that</span> shall not profit <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_7">7&#160;</span> For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have I cried <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>concerning this, Their strength <span class='add'>is</span> to sit still.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for <a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the time to come for ever and ever:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_9">9&#160;</span>That this <span class='add'>is</span> a rebellious people, lying children, children <span class='add'>that</span> will not hear the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_10">10&#160;</span> Which say to the seers, See not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_11">11&#160;</span> Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_12">12&#160;</span> Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at an instant.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_14">14&#160;</span> And he shall break it as the breaking of <a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the potters’ vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water <span class='add'>withal</span> out of the pit.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_15">15&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, the Holy One of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_16">16&#160;</span> But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_17">17&#160;</span> One thousand <span class='add'>shall flee</span> at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as <a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And therefore will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a God of judgment: <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blessed <span class='add'>are</span> all they that wait for him.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_19">19&#160;</span> For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_20">20&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>though</span> the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of <a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_21">21&#160;</span> And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_22">22&#160;</span> Ye shall defile also the covering of <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee hence.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_23">23&#160;</span> Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large pastures.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_24">24&#160;</span> The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall eat <a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with the fan.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_25">25&#160;</span> And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>high hill, rivers <span class='add'>and</span> streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_26">26&#160;</span> Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cometh from far, burning <span class='add'>with</span> his anger, <a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the burden <span class='add'>thereof is</span> <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heavy: his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire:
<span class="verse" id="IS30_28">28&#160;</span> And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and <span class='add'>there shall be</span> a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing <span class='add'>them</span> to err.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_29">29&#160;</span> Ye shall have a song, as in the night <span class='add'>when</span> a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to the <a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mighty One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_30">30&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall cause <a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his glorious voice to be heard, and shall shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of <span class='add'>his</span> anger, and <span class='add'>with</span> the flame of a devouring fire, <span class='add'>with</span> scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_31">31&#160;</span> For through the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall the Assyrian be beaten down, <span class='add'>which</span> smote with a rod.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_32">32&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>in</span> every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall <a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lay upon him, <span class='add'>it</span> shall be with tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with it.
<span class="verse" id="IS30_33">33&#160;</span> For Tophet <span class='add'>is</span> ordained <a href='#FN408' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made <span class='add'>it</span> deep <span class='add'>and</span> large: the pile thereof <span class='add'>is</span> fire and much wood; the breath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because <span class='add'>they are</span> many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>!
<span class="verse" id="IS31_2">2&#160;</span>Yet he also <span class='add'>is</span> wise, and will bring evil, and will not <a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>call back his words: but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="IS31_3">3&#160;</span> Now the Egyptians <span class='add'>are</span> men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all shall fail together.
<span class="verse" id="IS31_4">4&#160;</span> For thus hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him, <span class='add'>he</span> will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the <a href='#FN410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>noise of them: so shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS31_5">5&#160;</span> As birds flying, so will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver <span class='add'>it; and</span> passing over he will preserve it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Turn ye unto <span class='add'>him from</span> whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted.
<span class="verse" id="IS31_7">7&#160;</span> For in that day every man shall <a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cast away his idols of silver, and <a href='#FN412' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you <span class='add'>for</span> a sin.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee <a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>from the sword, and his young men shall be <a href='#FN414' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN415' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discomfited.
<span class="verse" id="IS31_9">9&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN416' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he shall pass over to <a href='#FN417' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his strong hold for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, whose fire <span class='add'>is</span> in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_1">1&#160;</span> Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_2">2&#160;</span> And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a <a href='#FN418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>great rock in a weary land.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_3">3&#160;</span> And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_4">4&#160;</span> The heart also of the <a href='#FN419' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak <a href='#FN420' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>plainly.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_5">5&#160;</span> The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said <span class='add'>to be</span> bountiful.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_6">6&#160;</span> For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_7">7&#160;</span> The instruments also of the churl <span class='add'>are</span> evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even <a href='#FN421' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when the needy speaketh right.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_8">8&#160;</span> But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shall he <a href='#FN422' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stand.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear unto my speech.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN423' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_11">11&#160;</span> Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird <span class='add'>sackcloth</span> upon <span class='add'>your</span> loins.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_12">12&#160;</span> They shall lament for the teats, for <a href='#FN424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_13">13&#160;</span> Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns <span class='add'>and</span> briers; <a href='#FN425' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>yea, upon all the houses of joy <span class='add'>in</span> the joyous city:
<span class="verse" id="IS32_14">14&#160;</span> Because the palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left; the <a href='#FN426' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;
<span class="verse" id="IS32_15">15&#160;</span> Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and <a href='#FN427' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_16">16&#160;</span> Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_17">17&#160;</span> And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_18">18&#160;</span> And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places;
<span class="verse" id="IS32_19">19&#160;</span> When it shall hail, coming down on the forest; <a href='#FN428' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the city shall be low in a low place.
<span class="verse" id="IS32_20">20&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth <span class='add'>thither</span> the feet of the ox and the ass.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou <span class='add'>wast</span> not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; <span class='add'>and</span> when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_2">2&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_3">3&#160;</span> At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_4">4&#160;</span> And your spoil shall be gathered <span class='add'>like</span> the gathering of the caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon them.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_5">5&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_6">6&#160;</span> And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, <span class='add'>and</span> strength of <a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>salvation: the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his treasure.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, their <a href='#FN430' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_8">8&#160;</span> The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_9">9&#160;</span> The earth mourneth <span class='add'>and</span> languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN431' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off <span class='add'>their fruits</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_10">10&#160;</span> Now will I rise, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; now will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_11">11&#160;</span> Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath, <span class='add'>as</span> fire, shall devour you.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_12">12&#160;</span> And the people shall be <span class='add'>as</span> the burnings of lime: <span class='add'>as</span> thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Hear, ye <span class='add'>that are</span> far off, what I have done; and, ye <span class='add'>that are</span> near, acknowledge my might.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_14">14&#160;</span> The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?
<span class="verse" id="IS33_15">15&#160;</span> He that <a href='#FN432' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>walketh <a href='#FN433' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>righteously, and speaketh <a href='#FN434' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of <a href='#FN435' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing of <a href='#FN436' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil;
<span class="verse" id="IS33_16">16&#160;</span> He shall dwell on <a href='#FN437' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>high: his place of defence <span class='add'>shall be</span> the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters <span class='add'>shall be</span> sure.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_17">17&#160;</span> Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold <a href='#FN438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the land that is very far off.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_18">18&#160;</span> Thine heart shall meditate terror. <a href='#FN439' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Where <span class='add'>is</span> the scribe? where <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN440' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>receiver? where <span class='add'>is</span> he that counted the towers?
<span class="verse" id="IS33_19">19&#160;</span> Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst perceive; of a <a href='#FN441' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stammering tongue, <span class='add'>that thou canst</span> not understand.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_20">20&#160;</span> Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle <span class='add'>that</span> shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_21">21&#160;</span> But there the glorious <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>will be</span> unto us a place <a href='#FN442' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of broad rivers <span class='add'>and</span> streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant ship pass thereby.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_22">22&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> our judge, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> our <a href='#FN443' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lawgiver, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> our king; he will save us.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN444' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.
<span class="verse" id="IS33_24">24&#160;</span> And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein <span class='add'>shall be</span> forgiven <span class='add'>their</span> iniquity.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_1">1&#160;</span> Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and <a href='#FN445' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all that is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_2">2&#160;</span> For the indignation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> upon all nations, and <span class='add'>his</span> fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_3">3&#160;</span> Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_4">4&#160;</span> And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be <a href='#FN446' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a <a href='#FN447' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>falling <span class='add'>fig</span> from the fig tree.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_5">5&#160;</span> For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_6">6&#160;</span> The sword of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is filled with blood, it is made fat with fatness, <span class='add'>and</span> with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_7">7&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN448' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be <a href='#FN449' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_8">8&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it is</span> the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> <a href='#FN450' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>vengeance, <span class='add'>and</span> the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_9">9&#160;</span> And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning pitch.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_10">10&#160;</span> It shall not be quenched night nor day; <a href='#FN451' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN452' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN453' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>But the <a href='#FN454' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_12">12&#160;</span> They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none <span class='add'>shall be</span> there, and all her princes shall be nothing.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_13">13&#160;</span> And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, <span class='add'>and</span> a court for <a href='#FN455' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>owls.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN457' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with <a href='#FN458' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the <a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of rest.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_15">15&#160;</span> There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Seek ye out of the book of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them.
<span class="verse" id="IS34_17">17&#160;</span> And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_1">1&#160;</span> The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.
<span class="verse" id="IS35_2">2&#160;</span> It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> the excellency of our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_3">3&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN460' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.
<span class="verse" id="IS35_4">4&#160;</span> Say to them <span class='add'>that are</span> of a <a href='#FN461' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come <span class='add'>with</span> vengeance, <span class='add'>even</span> God <span class='add'>with</span> a recompence; he will come and save you.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_5">5&#160;</span> Then the <a href='#FN462' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>eyes of the blind shall be opened, and <a href='#FN463' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
<span class="verse" id="IS35_6">6&#160;</span> Then shall the <a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lame <span class='add'>man</span> leap as an hart, and the <a href='#FN465' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall <a href='#FN466' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>waters break out, and streams in the desert.
<span class="verse" id="IS35_7">7&#160;</span> And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN467' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>grass with reeds and rushes.
<span class="verse" id="IS35_8">8&#160;</span> And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; <a href='#FN468' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>but it <span class='add'>shall be</span> for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err <span class='add'>therein</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS35_9">9&#160;</span> No lion shall be there, nor <span class='add'>any</span> ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk <span class='add'>there:</span>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_10">10&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN469' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ransomed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_1">1&#160;</span> Now <a href='#FN470' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, <span class='add'>that</span> Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of Judah, and took them.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_2">2&#160;</span> And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller’s field.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_3">3&#160;</span> Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah’s son, which was over the house, and Shebna the <a href='#FN471' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scribe, and Joah, Asaph’s son, the recorder.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence <span class='add'>is</span> this wherein thou trustest?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_5">5&#160;</span> I say, <span class='add'>sayest thou</span>, (but <span class='add'>they are but</span> <a href='#FN472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vain words) <a href='#FN473' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>I have</span> counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebellest against me?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_6">6&#160;</span> Lo, thou trustest in the <a href='#FN474' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>staff of this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it: so <span class='add'>is</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_7">7&#160;</span> But if thou say to me, We trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God: <span class='add'>is it</span> not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_8">8&#160;</span> Now therefore give <a href='#FN475' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_9">9&#160;</span> How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_10">10&#160;</span> And am I now come up without the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against this land to destroy it? the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand <span class='add'>it:</span> and speak not to us in the Jews’ language, in the ears of the people that <span class='add'>are</span> on the wall. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_12">12&#160;</span>¶ But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thee to speak these words? <span class='add'>hath he</span> not <span class='add'>sent me</span> to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own piss with you?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_13">13&#160;</span> Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_14">14&#160;</span> Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall not be able to deliver you.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_15">15&#160;</span> Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_16">16&#160;</span> Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria, <a href='#FN476' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN477' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Make <span class='add'>an agreement</span> with me <span class='add'>by</span> a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;
<span class="verse" id="IS36_17">17&#160;</span> Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
<span class="verse" id="IS36_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Beware</span> lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_19">19&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>are</span> the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where <span class='add'>are</span> the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_20">20&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>are they</span> among all the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
<span class="verse" id="IS36_21">21&#160;</span> But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king’s commandment was, saying, Answer him not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that <span class='add'>was</span> over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with <span class='add'>their</span> clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN478' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard <span class='add'>it</span>, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_2">2&#160;</span> And he sent Eliakim, who <span class='add'>was</span> over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_3">3&#160;</span> And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day <span class='add'>is</span> a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of <a href='#FN479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and <span class='add'>there is</span> not strength to bring forth.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_4">4&#160;</span> It may be the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God, and will reprove the words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up <span class='add'>thy</span> prayer for the remnant that is <a href='#FN480' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>left.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_5">5&#160;</span> So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, I will <a href='#FN481' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_8">8&#160;</span>¶ So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_9">9&#160;</span> And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with thee. And when he heard <span class='add'>it</span>, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,
<span class="verse" id="IS37_10">10&#160;</span> Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
<span class="verse" id="IS37_12">12&#160;</span> Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, <span class='add'>as</span> Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which <span class='add'>were</span> in Telassar?
<span class="verse" id="IS37_13">13&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>is</span> the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and spread it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_15">15&#160;</span> And Hezekiah prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying,
<span class="verse" id="IS37_16">16&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest <span class='add'>between</span> the cherubims, thou <span class='add'>art</span> the God, <span class='add'>even</span> thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_17">17&#160;</span> Incline thine ear, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and hear; open thine eyes, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to reproach the living God.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_18">18&#160;</span> Of a truth, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the <a href='#FN482' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>nations, and their countries,
<span class="verse" id="IS37_19">19&#160;</span> And have <a href='#FN483' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cast their gods into the fire: for they <span class='add'>were</span> no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone: therefore they have destroyed them.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_20">20&#160;</span> Now therefore, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou <span class='add'>art</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> thou only. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria:
<span class="verse" id="IS37_22">22&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the word which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised thee, <span class='add'>and</span> laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_23">23&#160;</span> Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted <span class='add'>thy</span> voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? <span class='add'>even</span> against the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN484' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down <a href='#FN485' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the tall cedars thereof, <span class='add'>and</span> the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter into the height of his border, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN486' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the forest of his Carmel.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_25">25&#160;</span> I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of the <a href='#FN487' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>besieged places.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN488' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Hast thou not heard long ago, <span class='add'>how</span> I have done it; <span class='add'>and</span> of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities <span class='add'>into</span> ruinous heaps.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_27">27&#160;</span> Therefore their inhabitants <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN489' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of small power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were <span class='add'>as</span> the grass of the field, and <span class='add'>as</span> the green herb, <span class='add'>as</span> the grass on the housetops, and <span class='add'>as corn</span> blasted before it be grown up.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_28">28&#160;</span> But I know thy <a href='#FN490' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_29">29&#160;</span> Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_30">30&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat <span class='add'>this</span> year such as groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_31">31&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN491' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward:
<span class="verse" id="IS37_32">32&#160;</span> For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and <a href='#FN492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they that escape out of mount Zion: the <a href='#FN493' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>zeal of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts shall do this.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_33">33&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_34">34&#160;</span> By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_35">35&#160;</span> For I will <a href='#FN494' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_36">36&#160;</span> Then the <a href='#FN495' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they <span class='add'>were</span> all dead corpses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_37">37&#160;</span>¶ So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.
<span class="verse" id="IS37_38">38&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of <a href='#FN496' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Armenia: and Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_1">1&#160;</span> In <a href='#FN497' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN498' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_2">2&#160;</span> Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>,
<span class="verse" id="IS38_3">3&#160;</span> And said, Remember now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done <span class='add'>that which is</span> good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept <a href='#FN499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sore.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Isaiah, saying,
<span class="verse" id="IS38_5">5&#160;</span> Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_6">6&#160;</span> And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_7">7&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sign unto thee from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will do this thing that he hath spoken;
<span class="verse" id="IS38_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the <a href='#FN500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_9">9&#160;</span>¶ The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness:
<span class="verse" id="IS38_10">10&#160;</span> I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_11">11&#160;</span> I said, I shall not see the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_12">12&#160;</span> Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd’s tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off <a href='#FN501' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with pining sickness: from day <span class='add'>even</span> to night wilt thou make an end of me.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_13">13&#160;</span> I reckoned till morning, <span class='add'>that</span>, as a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day <span class='add'>even</span> to night wilt thou make an end of me.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_14">14&#160;</span> Like a crane <span class='add'>or</span> a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail <span class='add'>with looking</span> upward: O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I am oppressed; <a href='#FN502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>undertake for me.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_15">15&#160;</span> What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done <span class='add'>it:</span> I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_16">16&#160;</span> O Lord, by these <span class='add'>things men</span> live, and in all these <span class='add'>things is</span> the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_17">17&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN503' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for peace I had great bitterness: but <a href='#FN504' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou hast in love to my soul <span class='add'>delivered it</span> from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_18">18&#160;</span> For the grave cannot praise thee, death can <span class='add'>not</span> celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_19">19&#160;</span> The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I <span class='add'>do</span> this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_20">20&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was ready</span> to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_21">21&#160;</span> For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay <span class='add'>it</span> for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.
<span class="verse" id="IS38_22">22&#160;</span> Hezekiah also had said, What <span class='add'>is</span> the sign that I shall go up to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_1">1&#160;</span> At <a href='#FN505' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that time Merodach-baladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.
<span class="verse" id="IS39_2">2&#160;</span> And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his <a href='#FN506' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his <a href='#FN507' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN508' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>armour, and all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, <span class='add'>even</span> from Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="IS39_4">4&#160;</span> Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, All that <span class='add'>is</span> in mine house have they seen: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_5">5&#160;</span> Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts:
<span class="verse" id="IS39_6">6&#160;</span> Behold, the days come, that all that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine house, and <span class='add'>that</span> which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS39_7">7&#160;</span> And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="IS39_8">8&#160;</span> Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good <span class='add'>is</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my days.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_1">1&#160;</span> Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_2">2&#160;</span> Speak ye <a href='#FN509' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her <a href='#FN510' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> hand double for all her sins.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_3">3&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN511' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_4">4&#160;</span> Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made <a href='#FN512' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>straight, and the rough places <a href='#FN513' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>plain:
<span class="verse" id="IS40_5">5&#160;</span> And the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see <span class='add'>it</span> together: for the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_6">6&#160;</span> The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? <a href='#FN514' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All flesh <span class='add'>is</span> grass, and all the goodliness thereof <span class='add'>is</span> as the flower of the field:
<span class="verse" id="IS40_7">7&#160;</span> The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bloweth upon it: surely the people <span class='add'>is</span> grass.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_8">8&#160;</span> The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the <a href='#FN515' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>word of our God shall stand for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_9">9&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN516' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain; <a href='#FN517' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift <span class='add'>it</span> up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God!
<span class="verse" id="IS40_10">10&#160;</span> Behold, the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will come <a href='#FN518' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with strong <span class='add'>hand</span>, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, <a href='#FN519' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his reward <span class='add'>is</span> with him, and <a href='#FN520' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his work before him.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_11">11&#160;</span> He shall <a href='#FN521' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry <span class='add'>them</span> in his bosom, <span class='add'>and</span> shall gently lead those <a href='#FN522' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that are with young.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in <a href='#FN523' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?
<span class="verse" id="IS40_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN524' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who hath directed the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, or <span class='add'>being</span> <a href='#FN525' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his counsellor hath taught him?
<span class="verse" id="IS40_14">14&#160;</span> With whom took he counsel, and <span class='add'>who</span> <a href='#FN526' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of <a href='#FN527' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understanding?
<span class="verse" id="IS40_15">15&#160;</span> Behold, the nations <span class='add'>are</span> as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little thing.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_16">16&#160;</span> And Lebanon <span class='add'>is</span> not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_17">17&#160;</span> All nations before him <span class='add'>are</span> as <a href='#FN528' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>nothing; and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_18">18&#160;</span>¶ To whom then will ye <a href='#FN529' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>liken God? or what likeness will ye compare unto him?
<span class="verse" id="IS40_19">19&#160;</span> The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_20">20&#160;</span>He that <a href='#FN530' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>is</span> so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a tree <span class='add'>that</span> will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to prepare a graven image, <span class='add'>that</span> shall not be moved.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_21">21&#160;</span> Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?
<span class="verse" id="IS40_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN531' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof <span class='add'>are</span> as grasshoppers; that <a href='#FN532' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:
<span class="verse" id="IS40_23">23&#160;</span> That bringeth the <a href='#FN533' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_24">24&#160;</span> Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown: yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_25">25&#160;</span> To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the Holy One.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_26">26&#160;</span> Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these <span class='add'>things</span>, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by names by the greatness of his might, for that <span class='add'>he is</span> strong in power; not one faileth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_27">27&#160;</span> Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and my judgment is passed over from my God? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, <span class='add'>that</span> the everlasting God, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? <a href='#FN534' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>there is</span> no searching of his understanding.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_29">29&#160;</span> He giveth power to the faint; and to <span class='add'>them that have</span> no might he increaseth strength.
<span class="verse" id="IS40_30">30&#160;</span> Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall:
<span class="verse" id="IS40_31">31&#160;</span> But they that wait upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall <a href='#FN535' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>renew <span class='add'>their</span> strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; <span class='add'>and</span> they shall walk, and not faint.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_1">1&#160;</span> Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew <span class='add'>their</span> strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_2">2&#160;</span> Who raised up <a href='#FN536' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the righteous <span class='add'>man</span> from the east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made <span class='add'>him</span> rule over kings? he gave <span class='add'>them</span> as the dust to his sword, <span class='add'>and</span> as driven stubble to his bow.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_3">3&#160;</span> He pursued them, <span class='add'>and</span> passed <a href='#FN537' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>safely; <span class='add'>even</span> by the way <span class='add'>that</span> he had not gone with his feet.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_4">4&#160;</span> Who hath wrought and done <span class='add'>it</span>, calling the generations from the beginning? I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the <a href='#FN538' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>first, and with the last; I <span class='add'>am</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_5">5&#160;</span> The isles saw <span class='add'>it</span>, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_6">6&#160;</span> They helped every one his neighbour; and <span class='add'>every one</span> said to his brother, <a href='#FN539' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Be of good courage.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_7">7&#160;</span> So the carpenter encouraged the <a href='#FN540' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>goldsmith, <span class='add'>and</span> he that smootheth <span class='add'>with</span> the hammer <a href='#FN541' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>him that smote the anvil, <a href='#FN542' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>saying, It <span class='add'>is</span> ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, <span class='add'>that</span> it should not be moved.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_8">8&#160;</span> But thou, Israel, <span class='add'>art</span> my servant, Jacob whom I have <a href='#FN543' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>chosen, the seed of Abraham my <a href='#FN544' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>friend.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Thou</span> whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Fear thou not; for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee: be not dismayed; for I <span class='add'>am</span> thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be <a href='#FN545' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and <a href='#FN546' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they that strive with thee shall perish.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_12">12&#160;</span> Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN547' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>them that contended with thee: <a href='#FN548' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of nought.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_13">13&#160;</span> For I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not; I will help thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_14">14&#160;</span> Fear not, thou worm Jacob, <span class='add'>and</span> ye <a href='#FN549' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>men of Israel; I will help thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_15">15&#160;</span> Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having <a href='#FN550' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat <span class='add'>them</span> small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_16">16&#160;</span> Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>When</span> the poor and needy seek water, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none, <span class='add'>and</span> their tongue faileth for thirst, I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_18">18&#160;</span> I will open <a href='#FN551' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the <a href='#FN552' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_19">19&#160;</span> I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree, <span class='add'>and</span> the pine, and the box tree together:
<span class="verse" id="IS41_20">20&#160;</span> That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN553' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Produce your cause, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; bring forth your strong <span class='add'>reasons</span>, saith the King of Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_22">22&#160;</span>Let them bring <span class='add'>them</span> forth, and shew us what shall happen: let them shew the former things, what they <span class='add'>be</span>, that we may <a href='#FN554' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_23">23&#160;</span> Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye <span class='add'>are</span> gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold <span class='add'>it</span> together.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_24">24&#160;</span>Behold, ye <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN555' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of nothing, and your work <a href='#FN556' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of nought: an abomination <span class='add'>is he that</span> chooseth you.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_25">25&#160;</span> I have raised up <span class='add'>one</span> from the north, and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon princes as <span class='add'>upon</span> morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_26">26&#160;</span> Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, <span class='add'>He is</span> righteous? yea, <span class='add'>there is</span> none that sheweth, yea, <span class='add'>there is</span> none that declareth, yea, <span class='add'>there is</span> none that heareth your words.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_27">27&#160;</span> The first <span class='add'>shall say</span> to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_28">28&#160;</span> For I beheld, and <span class='add'>there was</span> no man; even among them, and <span class='add'>there was</span> no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could <a href='#FN557' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>answer a word.
<span class="verse" id="IS41_29">29&#160;</span>Behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> all vanity; their works <span class='add'>are</span> nothing: their molten images <span class='add'>are</span> wind and confusion.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_1">1&#160;</span> Behold <a href='#FN558' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, <span class='add'>in whom</span> my soul <a href='#FN559' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_2">2&#160;</span> He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_3">3&#160;</span> A bruised reed shall he not break, and the <a href='#FN560' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>smoking flax shall he not <a href='#FN561' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_4">4&#160;</span> He shall not fail nor be <a href='#FN562' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith God the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein:
<span class="verse" id="IS42_6">6&#160;</span> I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for <a href='#FN563' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a light of the Gentiles;
<span class="verse" id="IS42_7">7&#160;</span> To open the blind eyes, to <a href='#FN564' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bring out the prisoners from the prison, <span class='add'>and</span> them that sit in <a href='#FN565' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>darkness out of the prison house.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_8">8&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: that <span class='add'>is</span> my name: and my <a href='#FN566' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_10">10&#160;</span> Sing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> a new song, <span class='add'>and</span> his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and <a href='#FN567' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_11">11&#160;</span> Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up <span class='add'>their voice</span>, the villages <span class='add'>that</span> Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_12">12&#160;</span> Let them give glory unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and declare his praise in the islands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_13">13&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall <a href='#FN568' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>prevail against his enemies.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_14">14&#160;</span> I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, <span class='add'>and</span> refrained myself: <span class='add'>now</span> will I cry like a travailing woman; I will destroy and <a href='#FN569' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>devour at once.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_15">15&#160;</span> I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the pools.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_16">16&#160;</span> And I will bring the blind by a way <span class='add'>that</span> they knew not; I will lead them in paths <span class='add'>that</span> they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things <a href='#FN570' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_17">17&#160;</span>¶ They shall be <a href='#FN571' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> our gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_18">18&#160;</span> Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_19">19&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger <span class='add'>that</span> I sent? who <span class='add'>is</span> blind as <span class='add'>he that is</span> perfect, and blind as the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> servant?
<span class="verse" id="IS42_20">20&#160;</span> Seeing many things, <a href='#FN572' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_21">21&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is well pleased for his righteousness’ sake; he will magnify the law, and make <a href='#FN573' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>it</span> honourable.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_22">22&#160;</span>But this <span class='add'>is</span> a people robbed and spoiled; <a href='#FN574' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>they are</span> all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for <a href='#FN575' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a spoil, and none saith, Restore.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_23">23&#160;</span> Who among you will give ear to this? <span class='add'>who</span> will hearken and hear <a href='#FN576' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for the time to come?
<span class="verse" id="IS42_24">24&#160;</span> Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law.
<span class="verse" id="IS42_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid <span class='add'>it</span> not to heart.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS43_0'> 43</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_1">1&#160;</span> But now thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called <span class='add'>thee</span> by thy name; thou <span class='add'>art</span> mine.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_2">2&#160;</span> When thou passest through the waters, I <span class='add'>will be</span> with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_3">3&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt <span class='add'>for</span> thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_4">4&#160;</span> Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people for thy <a href='#FN577' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>life.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN578' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Fear not: for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee: I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;
<span class="verse" id="IS43_6">6&#160;</span> I will say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth;
<span class="verse" id="IS43_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> every one that is called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_9">9&#160;</span> Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be assembled: <a href='#FN579' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, <span class='add'>It is</span> truth.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_10">10&#160;</span>Ye <span class='add'>are</span> my witnesses, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I <span class='add'>am</span> he: <a href='#FN580' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>before me there was <a href='#FN581' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>no God formed, neither shall there be after me.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_11">11&#160;</span>I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, <a href='#FN582' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and beside me <span class='add'>there is</span> no saviour.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_12">12&#160;</span> I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when <span class='add'>there was</span> no strange <span class='add'>god</span> among you: therefore ye <span class='add'>are</span> my witnesses, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I <span class='add'>am</span> God.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_13">13&#160;</span> Yea, before the day <span class='add'>was</span> I <span class='add'>am</span> he; and <span class='add'>there is</span> none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall <a href='#FN583' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN584' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>let it?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their <a href='#FN585' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry <span class='add'>is</span> in the ships.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_15">15&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_16">16&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which <a href='#FN586' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>maketh a way in the sea, and a <a href='#FN587' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>path in the mighty waters;
<span class="verse" id="IS43_17">17&#160;</span> Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_19">19&#160;</span> Behold, I will do a <a href='#FN588' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, <span class='add'>and</span> rivers in the desert.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_20">20&#160;</span> The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the <a href='#FN589' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN590' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, <span class='add'>and</span> rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN591' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_22">22&#160;</span>¶ But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_23">23&#160;</span> Thou hast not brought me the <a href='#FN592' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>small cattle of thy burnt offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_24">24&#160;</span> Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou <a href='#FN593' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_25">25&#160;</span>I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, <span class='add'>am</span> he that <a href='#FN594' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_26">26&#160;</span> Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_27">27&#160;</span> Thy first father hath sinned, and thy <a href='#FN595' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>teachers have transgressed against me.
<span class="verse" id="IS43_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore I have profaned the <a href='#FN596' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS44_0'> 44</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_1">1&#160;</span> Yet now hear, <a href='#FN597' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:
<span class="verse" id="IS44_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, <span class='add'>which</span> will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_3">3&#160;</span> For I will <a href='#FN598' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring:
<span class="verse" id="IS44_4">4&#160;</span> And they shall spring up <span class='add'>as</span> among the grass, as willows by the water courses.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_5">5&#160;</span> One shall say, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>; and another shall call <span class='add'>himself</span> by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe <span class='add'>with</span> his hand unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and surname <span class='add'>himself</span> by the name of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_6">6&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the King of Israel, and his redeemer the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <a href='#FN599' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> the first, and I <span class='add'>am</span> the last; and beside me <span class='add'>there is</span> no God.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_7">7&#160;</span> And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_8">8&#160;</span> Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that time, and have declared <span class='add'>it</span>? ye <span class='add'>are</span> even my witnesses. Is there a God beside me? yea, <a href='#FN600' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>there is</span> no <a href='#FN601' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>God; I know not <span class='add'>any</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_9">9&#160;</span>¶ They that make a graven image <span class='add'>are</span> all of them vanity; and their <a href='#FN602' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>delectable things shall not profit; and they <span class='add'>are</span> their own witnesses; <a href='#FN603' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_10">10&#160;</span> Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image <span class='add'>that</span> is profitable for nothing?
<span class="verse" id="IS44_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, all his fellows shall be <a href='#FN604' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ashamed: and the workmen, they <span class='add'>are</span> of men: let them all be gathered together, let them stand up; <span class='add'>yet</span> they shall fear, <span class='add'>and</span> they shall be ashamed together.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN605' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The smith <a href='#FN606' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_13">13&#160;</span> The carpenter stretcheth out <span class='add'>his</span> rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_14">14&#160;</span> He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak, which he <a href='#FN607' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_15">15&#160;</span> Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth <span class='add'>it</span>, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth <span class='add'>it;</span> he maketh it a graven image, and falleth down thereto.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_16">16&#160;</span> He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth <span class='add'>himself</span>, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:
<span class="verse" id="IS44_17">17&#160;</span> And the residue thereof he maketh a god, <span class='add'>even</span> his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth <span class='add'>it</span>, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> my god.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_18">18&#160;</span> They have not known nor understood: for he hath <a href='#FN608' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shut their eyes, that they cannot see; <span class='add'>and</span> their hearts, that they cannot understand.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_19">19&#160;</span> And none <a href='#FN609' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>considereth in his heart, neither <span class='add'>is there</span> knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten <span class='add'>it:</span> and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I fall down to <a href='#FN610' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the stock of a tree?
<span class="verse" id="IS44_20">20&#160;</span> He feedeth <a href='#FN611' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, <span class='add'>Is there</span> not a lie in my right hand? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> my servant: I have formed thee; thou <span class='add'>art</span> my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_22">22&#160;</span> I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_23">23&#160;</span> Sing, O ye heavens; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath done <span class='add'>it:</span> shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS44_24">24&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that maketh all <span class='add'>things;</span> that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself;
<span class="verse" id="IS44_25">25&#160;</span> That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise <span class='add'>men</span> backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;
<span class="verse" id="IS44_26">26&#160;</span> That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the <a href='#FN612' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>decayed places thereof:
<span class="verse" id="IS44_27">27&#160;</span> That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers:
<span class="verse" id="IS44_28">28&#160;</span> That saith of Cyrus, <span class='add'>He is</span> my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, <a href='#FN613' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS45_0'> 45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I <a href='#FN614' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall not be shut;
<span class="verse" id="IS45_2">2&#160;</span> I will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron:
<span class="verse" id="IS45_3">3&#160;</span> And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which call <span class='add'>thee</span> by thy name, <span class='add'>am</span> the God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_4">4&#160;</span> For Jacob my servant’s sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not known me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_5">5&#160;</span>¶ I <a href='#FN615' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none else, <span class='add'>there is</span> no God beside me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known me:
<span class="verse" id="IS45_6">6&#160;</span> That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that <span class='add'>there is</span> none beside me. I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none else.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_7">7&#160;</span> I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do all these <span class='add'>things</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_8">8&#160;</span> Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have created it.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_9">9&#160;</span> Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! <span class='add'>Let</span> the potsherd <span class='add'>strive</span> with the potsherds of the earth. <a href='#FN616' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?
<span class="verse" id="IS45_10">10&#160;</span> Woe unto him that saith unto <span class='add'>his</span> father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_11">11&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_12">12&#160;</span> I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, <span class='add'>even</span> my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I commanded.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_13">13&#160;</span> I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will <a href='#FN617' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>direct all his ways: he shall <a href='#FN618' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_14">14&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall make supplication unto thee, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Surely God <span class='add'>is</span> in thee; and <span class='add'>there is</span> none else, <span class='add'>there is</span> no God.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_15">15&#160;</span> Verily thou <span class='add'>art</span> a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_16">16&#160;</span> They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together <span class='add'>that are</span> <a href='#FN619' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>makers of idols.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> Israel shall be saved in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_18">18&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and <span class='add'>there is</span> none else.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_19">19&#160;</span> I have not spoken in <a href='#FN620' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> speak righteousness, I declare things that are right. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye <span class='add'>that are</span> escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray unto a god <span class='add'>that</span> cannot save.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_21">21&#160;</span> Tell ye, and bring <span class='add'>them</span> near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? <span class='add'>who</span> hath told it from that time? <span class='add'>have</span> not I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? and <span class='add'>there is</span> no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; <span class='add'>there is</span> none beside me.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_22">22&#160;</span> Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I <span class='add'>am</span> God, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none else.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_23">23&#160;</span> I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth <span class='add'>in</span> righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every <a href='#FN621' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.
<span class="verse" id="IS45_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN622' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Surely, shall <span class='add'>one</span> say, in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have I <a href='#FN623' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>righteousness and strength: <span class='add'>even</span> to him shall <span class='add'>men</span> come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_25">25&#160;</span> In the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS46_0'> 46</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_1">1&#160;</span> Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your carriages <span class='add'>were</span> heavy loaden; <span class='add'>they are</span> a burden to the weary <span class='add'>beast</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS46_2">2&#160;</span> They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but <a href='#FN624' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>themselves are gone into captivity.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne <span class='add'>by me</span> from the belly, which are carried from the womb:
<span class="verse" id="IS46_4">4&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>even</span> to <span class='add'>your</span> old age I <span class='add'>am</span> he; and <span class='add'>even</span> to hoar hairs will I carry <span class='add'>you:</span> I have made, and I will bear; even I will carry, and will deliver <span class='add'>you</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN625' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>To whom will ye liken me, and make <span class='add'>me</span> equal, and compare me, that we may be like?
<span class="verse" id="IS46_6">6&#160;</span> They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, <span class='add'>and</span> hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they fall down, yea, they worship.
<span class="verse" id="IS46_7">7&#160;</span> They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea, <span class='add'>one</span> shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble.
<span class="verse" id="IS46_8">8&#160;</span> Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring <span class='add'>it</span> again to mind, O ye transgressors.
<span class="verse" id="IS46_9">9&#160;</span> Remember the former things of old: for I <span class='add'>am</span> God, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none else; <span class='add'>I am</span> God, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none like me,
<span class="verse" id="IS46_10">10&#160;</span> Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times <span class='add'>the things</span> that are not <span class='add'>yet</span> done, saying, <a href='#FN626' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure:
<span class="verse" id="IS46_11">11&#160;</span> Calling a ravenous bird from the east, <a href='#FN627' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed <span class='add'>it</span>, I will also do it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that <span class='add'>are</span> far from righteousness:
<span class="verse" id="IS46_13">13&#160;</span> I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS47_0'> 47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_1">1&#160;</span> Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: <span class='add'>there is</span> no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_2">2&#160;</span> Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_3">3&#160;</span> Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet <span class='add'>thee as</span> a man.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> our redeemer, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name, the Holy One of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_5">5&#160;</span> Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_6">6&#160;</span>¶ I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid <a href='#FN628' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy yoke. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And thou saidst, I shall be <a href='#FN629' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a lady for ever: <span class='add'>so</span> that thou didst not lay these <span class='add'>things</span> to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter end of it.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore hear now this, <span class='add'>thou that art</span> given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I <span class='add'>am</span>, and none else beside me; I shall not sit <span class='add'>as</span> a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children:
<span class="verse" id="IS47_9">9&#160;</span> But these two <a href='#FN630' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>things</span> shall come to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, <span class='add'>and</span> for the great abundance of thine enchantments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_10">10&#160;</span>¶ For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath <a href='#FN631' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>perverted thee; and thou hast said in thine heart, I <span class='add'>am</span>, and none else beside me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know <a href='#FN632' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be able to <a href='#FN633' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, <span class='add'>which</span> thou shalt not know.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_12">12&#160;</span> Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_13">13&#160;</span> Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the <a href='#FN634' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>astrologers, the stargazers, <a href='#FN635' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from <span class='add'>these things</span> that shall come upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver <a href='#FN636' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>themselves from the power of the flame: <span class='add'>there shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> a coal to warm at, <span class='add'>nor</span> fire to sit before it.
<span class="verse" id="IS47_15">15&#160;</span> Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, <span class='add'>even</span> thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his quarter; none shall save thee.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS48_0'> 48</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_1">1&#160;</span> Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and make mention of the God of Israel, <span class='add'>but</span> not in truth, nor in righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_2">2&#160;</span> For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_3">3&#160;</span> I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did <span class='add'>them</span> suddenly, and they came to pass.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_4">4&#160;</span> Because I knew that thou <span class='add'>art</span> <a href='#FN637' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>obstinate, and thy neck <span class='add'>is</span> an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;
<span class="verse" id="IS48_5">5&#160;</span> I have even from the beginning declared <span class='add'>it</span> to thee; before it came to pass I shewed <span class='add'>it</span> thee: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath commanded them.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_6">6&#160;</span> Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare <span class='add'>it</span>? I have shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou didst not know them.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_7">7&#160;</span> They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_8">8&#160;</span> Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time <span class='add'>that</span> thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_9">9&#160;</span>¶ For my name’s sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_10">10&#160;</span> Behold, I have refined thee, but not <a href='#FN638' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_11">11&#160;</span>For mine own sake, <span class='add'>even</span> for mine own sake, will I do <span class='add'>it:</span> for how should <span class='add'>my name</span> be polluted? and <a href='#FN639' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will not give my glory unto another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I <span class='add'>am</span> he; I <span class='add'>am</span> the <a href='#FN640' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>first, I also <span class='add'>am</span> the last.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_13">13&#160;</span> Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and <a href='#FN641' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>my right hand hath spanned the heavens: <span class='add'>when</span> I call unto them, they stand up together.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_14">14&#160;</span> All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these <span class='add'>things</span>? The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath loved him: he will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm <span class='add'>shall be on</span> the Chaldeans.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_15">15&#160;</span>I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was, there <span class='add'>am</span> I: and now the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, and his Spirit, hath sent me.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_17">17&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way <span class='add'>that</span> thou shouldest go.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_18">18&#160;</span> O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:
<span class="verse" id="IS48_19">19&#160;</span> Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off nor destroyed from before me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it <span class='add'>even</span> to the end of the earth; say ye, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath <a href='#FN642' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>redeemed his servant Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_21">21&#160;</span> And they thirsted not <span class='add'>when</span> he led them through the deserts: he <a href='#FN643' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out.
<span class="verse" id="IS48_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN644' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>There is</span> no peace, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, unto the wicked.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS49_0'> 49</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_1">1&#160;</span> Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_2">2&#160;</span> And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me;
<span class="verse" id="IS49_3">3&#160;</span> And said unto me, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_4">4&#160;</span> Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: <span class='add'>yet</span> surely my judgment <span class='add'>is</span> with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <a href='#FN645' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>my work with my God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And now, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that formed me from the womb <span class='add'>to be</span> his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, <a href='#FN646' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and my God shall be my strength.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_6">6&#160;</span> And he said, <a href='#FN647' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the <a href='#FN648' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a <a href='#FN649' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_7">7&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Redeemer of Israel, <span class='add'>and</span> his Holy One, <a href='#FN650' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that is faithful, <span class='add'>and</span> the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_8">8&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN651' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to <a href='#FN652' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;
<span class="verse" id="IS49_9">9&#160;</span> That thou mayest say <a href='#FN653' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that <span class='add'>are</span> in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures <span class='add'>shall be</span> in all high places.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_10">10&#160;</span> They shall not <a href='#FN654' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_11">11&#160;</span> And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_12">12&#160;</span> Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Sing, O <a href='#FN655' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for <a href='#FN656' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_14">14&#160;</span> But Zion said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_15">15&#160;</span> Can a woman forget her sucking child, <a href='#FN657' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_16">16&#160;</span> Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of <span class='add'>my</span> hands; thy walls <span class='add'>are</span> continually before me.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_17">17&#160;</span> Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_18">18&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN658' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, <span class='add'>and</span> come to thee. <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them <span class='add'>on thee</span>, as a bride <span class='add'>doeth</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_19">19&#160;</span> For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_20">20&#160;</span> The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place <span class='add'>is</span> too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_21">21&#160;</span> Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where <span class='add'>had</span> they <span class='add'>been</span>?
<span class="verse" id="IS49_22">22&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in <span class='add'>their</span> <a href='#FN659' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon <span class='add'>their</span> shoulders.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_23">23&#160;</span> And kings shall be thy <a href='#FN660' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>nursing fathers, and their <a href='#FN661' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with <span class='add'>their</span> face toward the earth, and <a href='#FN662' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or <a href='#FN663' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the lawful captive delivered?
<span class="verse" id="IS49_25">25&#160;</span> But thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Even the <a href='#FN664' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children.
<span class="verse" id="IS49_26">26&#160;</span> And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own <a href='#FN665' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blood, as with <a href='#FN666' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>am</span> thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS50_0'> 50</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the bill of your mother’s divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors <span class='add'>is it</span> to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.
<span class="verse" id="IS50_2">2&#160;</span> Wherefore, when I came, <span class='add'>was there</span> no man? when I called, <span class='add'>was there</span> none to answer? <a href='#FN667' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I <a href='#FN668' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dry up the sea, I make the <a href='#FN669' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because <span class='add'>there is</span> no water, and dieth for thirst.
<span class="verse" id="IS50_3">3&#160;</span> I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_4">4&#160;</span> The Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to <span class='add'>him that is</span> <a href='#FN670' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_5">5&#160;</span>¶ The Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> hath opened mine ear, and I was not <a href='#FN671' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rebellious, neither turned away back.
<span class="verse" id="IS50_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN672' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_7">7&#160;</span>¶ For the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.
<span class="verse" id="IS50_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN673' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>He is</span> near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us stand together: who <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN674' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mine adversary? let him come near to me.
<span class="verse" id="IS50_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will help me; who <span class='add'>is</span> he <span class='add'>that</span> shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Who <span class='add'>is</span> among you that feareth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh <span class='add'>in</span> darkness, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and stay upon his God.
<span class="verse" id="IS50_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass <span class='add'>yourselves</span> about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks <span class='add'>that</span> ye have kindled. <a href='#FN675' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS51_0'> 51</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_1">1&#160;</span> Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: look unto the rock <span class='add'>whence</span> ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit <span class='add'>whence</span> ye are digged.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_2">2&#160;</span> Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah <span class='add'>that</span> bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_3">3&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_5">5&#160;</span> My righteousness <span class='add'>is</span> near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_6">6&#160;</span> Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for <a href='#FN676' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people <a href='#FN677' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in whose heart <span class='add'>is</span> my law; <a href='#FN678' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_8">8&#160;</span> For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. <span class='add'>Art</span> thou not it that hath cut Rahab, <span class='add'>and</span> wounded the <a href='#FN679' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dragon?
<span class="verse" id="IS51_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Art</span> thou not it which hath <a href='#FN680' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?
<span class="verse" id="IS51_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore <a href='#FN681' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the redeemed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; <span class='add'>and</span> sorrow and mourning shall flee away.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_12">12&#160;</span>I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, <span class='add'>am</span> he that comforteth you: who <span class='add'>art</span> thou, that thou shouldest be afraid <a href='#FN682' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of a man <span class='add'>that</span> shall die, and of the son of man <span class='add'>which</span> shall be made <a href='#FN683' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>as</span> grass;
<span class="verse" id="IS51_13">13&#160;</span> And forgettest the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he <a href='#FN684' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>were ready to destroy? and where <span class='add'>is</span> the fury of the oppressor?
<span class="verse" id="IS51_14">14&#160;</span> The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_15">15&#160;</span>But I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, that <a href='#FN685' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>divided the sea, whose waves roared: The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_16">16&#160;</span> And I have put my words <a href='#FN686' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN687' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, <span class='add'>and</span> wrung <span class='add'>them</span> out.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> none to guide her among all the sons <span class='add'>whom</span> she hath brought forth; neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> that taketh her by the hand of all the sons <span class='add'>that</span> she hath brought up.
<span class="verse" id="IS51_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN688' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> These two <span class='add'>things</span> <a href='#FN689' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and <a href='#FN690' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?
<span class="verse" id="IS51_20">20&#160;</span> Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the fury of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the rebuke of thy God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:
<span class="verse" id="IS51_22">22&#160;</span> Thus saith thy Lord the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thy God <span class='add'>that</span> pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, <span class='add'>even</span> the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again:
<span class="verse" id="IS51_23">23&#160;</span> But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the street, to them that went over.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS52_0'> 52</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_1">1&#160;</span> Awake, <a href='#FN691' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_2">2&#160;</span> Shake thyself from the dust; arise, <span class='add'>and</span> sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_3">3&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_4">4&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, My people went down aforetime into <a href='#FN692' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_5">5&#160;</span> Now therefore, what have I here, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that my people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and my name continually every day <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN693' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blasphemed.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore <span class='add'>they shall know</span> in that day that I <span class='add'>am</span> he that doth speak: behold, <span class='add'>it is</span> I. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN694' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!
<span class="verse" id="IS52_8">8&#160;</span> Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring again Zion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_10">10&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations; and <a href='#FN695' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN696' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean <span class='add'>thing;</span> go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_12">12&#160;</span> For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will go before you; and the God of Israel <span class='add'>will <a href='#FN697' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be</span> your rereward.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Behold, my servant shall <a href='#FN698' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.
<span class="verse" id="IS52_14">14&#160;</span> As many were astonied at thee; his <a href='#FN699' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men:
<span class="verse" id="IS52_15">15&#160;</span> So shall he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him: for <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN700' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which had not been told them shall they see; and <span class='add'>that</span> which they had not heard shall they consider.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS53_0'> 53</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_1">1&#160;</span> Who <a href='#FN701' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hath believed our <a href='#FN702' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN703' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>report? and to whom is the arm of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> revealed?
<span class="verse" id="IS53_2">2&#160;</span> For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, <span class='add'>there is</span> no beauty that we should desire him.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN704' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and <a href='#FN705' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN706' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>we hid as it were <span class='add'>our</span> faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Surely <a href='#FN707' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_5">5&#160;</span>But he <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN708' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN709' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wounded for our transgressions, <span class='add'>he was</span> bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace <span class='add'>was</span> upon him; and with his <a href='#FN710' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN711' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stripes we are healed.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_6">6&#160;</span> All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN712' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_7">7&#160;</span> He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet <a href='#FN713' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a <a href='#FN714' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN715' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people <a href='#FN716' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>was he stricken.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_9">9&#160;</span> And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his <a href='#FN717' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>death; because he had done no violence, neither <span class='add'>was any</span> <a href='#FN718' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>deceit in his mouth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Yet it pleased the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to bruise him; he hath put <span class='add'>him</span> to grief: <a href='#FN719' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see <span class='add'>his</span> seed, he shall prolong <span class='add'>his</span> days, and the pleasure of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall prosper in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_11">11&#160;</span> He shall see of the travail of his soul, <span class='add'>and</span> shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.
<span class="verse" id="IS53_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore will I divide him <span class='add'>a portion</span> with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was <a href='#FN720' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>numbered with the transgressors; and he bare the sin of many, and <a href='#FN721' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>made intercession for the transgressors.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS54_0'> 54</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN722' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Sing, O barren, thou <span class='add'>that</span> didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou <span class='add'>that</span> didst not travail with child: for more <span class='add'>are</span> the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_2">2&#160;</span> Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes;
<span class="verse" id="IS54_3">3&#160;</span> For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_4">4&#160;</span> Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_5">5&#160;</span> For thy Maker <span class='add'>is</span> thine husband; the <a href='#FN723' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shall he be called.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_6">6&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_7">7&#160;</span> For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_8">8&#160;</span> In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy Redeemer.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_9">9&#160;</span>For this <span class='add'>is as</span> the waters of <a href='#FN724' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Noah unto me: for <span class='add'>as</span> I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_10">10&#160;</span> For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that hath mercy on thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_11">11&#160;</span>¶ O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, <span class='add'>and</span> not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with <a href='#FN725' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fair colours, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_12">12&#160;</span> And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_13">13&#160;</span> And all thy children <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN726' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>taught of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and great <span class='add'>shall be</span> the peace of thy children.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_14">14&#160;</span> In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_15">15&#160;</span> Behold, they shall surely gather together, <span class='add'>but</span> not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.
<span class="verse" id="IS54_16">16&#160;</span> Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_17">17&#160;</span>¶ No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every tongue <span class='add'>that</span> shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This <span class='add'>is</span> the heritage of the servants of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and their righteousness <span class='add'>is</span> of me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS55_0'> 55</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_1">1&#160;</span> Ho, <a href='#FN727' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_2">2&#160;</span> Wherefore do ye <a href='#FN728' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spend money for <span class='add'>that which is</span> not bread? and your labour for <span class='add'>that which</span> satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye <span class='add'>that which is</span> good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_3">3&#160;</span> Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, <span class='add'>even</span> the <a href='#FN729' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sure mercies of David.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, I have given him <span class='add'>for</span> a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_5">5&#160;</span> Behold, thou shalt call a nation <span class='add'>that</span> thou knowest not, and nations <span class='add'>that</span> knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Seek ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near:
<span class="verse" id="IS55_7">7&#160;</span> Let the wicked forsake his way, and <a href='#FN730' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for <a href='#FN731' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he will abundantly pardon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_8">8&#160;</span>¶ For my thoughts <span class='add'>are</span> not your thoughts, neither <span class='add'>are</span> your ways my ways, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_9">9&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>as</span> the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_10">10&#160;</span> For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater:
<span class="verse" id="IS55_11">11&#160;</span> So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper <span class='add'>in the thing</span> whereto I sent it.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_12">12&#160;</span> For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall <a href='#FN732' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap <span class='add'>their</span> hands.
<span class="verse" id="IS55_13">13&#160;</span> Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for a name, for an everlasting sign <span class='add'>that</span> shall not be cut off.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS56_0'> 56</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Keep ye <a href='#FN733' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>judgment, and do justice: for my salvation <span class='add'>is</span> near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_2">2&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> doeth this, and the son of man <span class='add'>that</span> layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, speak, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> a dry tree.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_4">4&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose <span class='add'>the things</span> that please me, and take hold of my covenant;
<span class="verse" id="IS56_5">5&#160;</span> Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_6">6&#160;</span> Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to serve him, and to love the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant;
<span class="verse" id="IS56_7">7&#160;</span> Even them will I <a href='#FN734' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and their sacrifices <span class='add'>shall be</span> accepted upon mine altar; for <a href='#FN735' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_8">8&#160;</span> The Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet will I gather <span class='add'>others</span> to him, <a href='#FN736' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>beside those that are gathered unto him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_9">9&#160;</span>¶ All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, <span class='add'>yea</span>, all ye beasts in the forest.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_10">10&#160;</span> His watchmen <span class='add'>are</span> blind: they are all ignorant, they <span class='add'>are</span> all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; <a href='#FN737' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_11">11&#160;</span>Yea, <span class='add'>they are</span> <a href='#FN738' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>greedy dogs <span class='add'>which</span> <a href='#FN739' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>can never have enough, and they <span class='add'>are</span> shepherds <span class='add'>that</span> cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.
<span class="verse" id="IS56_12">12&#160;</span> Come ye, <span class='add'>say they</span>, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, <span class='add'>and</span> much more abundant.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS57_0'> 57</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_1">1&#160;</span> The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth <span class='add'>it</span> to heart: and <a href='#FN740' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN741' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>merciful men <span class='add'>are</span> taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away <a href='#FN742' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>from the evil <span class='add'>to come</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_2">2&#160;</span> He shall <a href='#FN743' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, <span class='add'>each one</span> walking <a href='#FN744' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>in</span> his uprightness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_3">3&#160;</span>¶ But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the whore.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_4">4&#160;</span> Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, <span class='add'>and</span> draw out the tongue? <span class='add'>are</span> ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,
<span class="verse" id="IS57_5">5&#160;</span> Enflaming yourselves <a href='#FN745' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with idols <a href='#FN746' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>under every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?
<span class="verse" id="IS57_6">6&#160;</span> Among the smooth <span class='add'>stones</span> of the stream <span class='add'>is</span> thy portion; they, they <span class='add'>are</span> thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?
<span class="verse" id="IS57_7">7&#160;</span> Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_8">8&#160;</span> Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered <span class='add'>thyself to another</span> than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and <a href='#FN747' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>made <a href='#FN748' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thee <span class='add'>a covenant</span> with them; thou lovedst their bed <a href='#FN749' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>where thou sawest <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_9">9&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN750' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase <span class='add'>thyself even</span> unto hell.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_10">10&#160;</span> Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; <span class='add'>yet</span> saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the <a href='#FN751' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_11">11&#160;</span> And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid <span class='add'>it</span> to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?
<span class="verse" id="IS57_12">12&#160;</span> I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_13">13&#160;</span>¶ When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take <span class='add'>them:</span> but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain;
<span class="verse" id="IS57_14">14&#160;</span> And shall say, <a href='#FN752' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_15">15&#160;</span> For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name <span class='add'>is</span> Holy; I dwell in the high and holy <span class='add'>place</span>, with him also <span class='add'>that is</span> of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_16">16&#160;</span> For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls <span class='add'>which</span> I have made. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_17">17&#160;</span> For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on <a href='#FN753' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>frowardly in the way of his heart.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_18">18&#160;</span> I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_19">19&#160;</span> I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to <span class='add'>him that is</span> far off, and to <span class='add'>him that is</span> near, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and I will heal him.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_20">20&#160;</span> But the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
<span class="verse" id="IS57_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN754' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>There is</span> no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS58_0'> 58</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_1">1&#160;</span> Cry <a href='#FN755' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.
<span class="verse" id="IS58_2">2&#160;</span> Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in approaching to God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore have we fasted, <span class='add'>say they</span>, and thou seest not? <span class='add'>wherefore</span> have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your <a href='#FN756' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN757' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>labours.
<span class="verse" id="IS58_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: <a href='#FN758' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ye shall not fast as <span class='add'>ye do this</span> day, to make your voice to be heard on high.
<span class="verse" id="IS58_5">5&#160;</span> Is it <a href='#FN759' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>such a fast that I have chosen? <a href='#FN760' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN761' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a day for a man to afflict his soul? <span class='add'>is it</span> to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes <span class='add'>under him</span>? wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="IS58_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo <a href='#FN762' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the heavy burdens, and to let the <a href='#FN763' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?
<span class="verse" id="IS58_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it</span> not <a href='#FN764' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are <a href='#FN765' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN766' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be thy rereward.
<span class="verse" id="IS58_9">9&#160;</span> Then shalt thou call, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I <span class='add'>am</span>. If thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity;
<span class="verse" id="IS58_10">10&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>if</span> thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness <span class='add'>be</span> as the noonday:
<span class="verse" id="IS58_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in <a href='#FN767' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters <a href='#FN768' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fail not.
<span class="verse" id="IS58_12">12&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>they that shall be</span> of thee <a href='#FN769' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_13">13&#160;</span>¶ If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, <span class='add'>from</span> doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking <span class='add'>thine own</span> words:
<span class="verse" id="IS58_14">14&#160;</span> Then shalt thou delight thyself in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and I will cause thee to <a href='#FN770' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS59_0'> 59</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_1">1&#160;</span> Behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> hand is not <a href='#FN771' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear:
<span class="verse" id="IS59_2">2&#160;</span> But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins <a href='#FN772' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have hid <span class='add'>his</span> face from you, that he will not hear.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_3">3&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN773' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_4">4&#160;</span> None calleth for justice, nor <span class='add'>any</span> pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; <a href='#FN774' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_5">5&#160;</span> They hatch <a href='#FN775' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cockatrice’ eggs, and weave the spider’s web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and <a href='#FN776' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN777' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works <span class='add'>are</span> works of iniquity, and the act of violence <span class='add'>is</span> in their hands.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN778' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts <span class='add'>are</span> thoughts of iniquity; wasting and <a href='#FN779' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destruction <span class='add'>are</span> in their paths.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_8">8&#160;</span> The way of peace they know not; and <span class='add'>there is</span> no <a href='#FN780' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, <span class='add'>but</span> we walk in darkness.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_10">10&#160;</span> We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if <span class='add'>we had</span> no eyes: we stumble at noonday as in the night; <span class='add'>we are</span> in desolate places as dead <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_11">11&#160;</span> We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for judgment, but <span class='add'>there is</span> none; for salvation, <span class='add'>but</span> it is far off from us.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_12">12&#160;</span> For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our transgressions <span class='add'>are</span> with us; and <span class='add'>as for</span> our iniquities, we know them;
<span class="verse" id="IS59_13">13&#160;</span> In transgressing and lying against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_14">14&#160;</span> And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_15">15&#160;</span> Yea, truth faileth; and he <span class='add'>that</span> departeth from evil <a href='#FN781' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>maketh himself a prey: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saw <span class='add'>it</span>, and <a href='#FN782' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it displeased him that <span class='add'>there was</span> no judgment.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And he saw that <span class='add'>there was</span> no man, and wondered that <span class='add'>there was</span> no intercessor: <a href='#FN783' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN784' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance <span class='add'>for</span> clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN785' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> According to <span class='add'>their</span> <a href='#FN786' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay recompence.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_19">19&#160;</span> So shall they fear the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in <a href='#FN787' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>like a flood, the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall <a href='#FN788' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lift up a standard against him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN789' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS59_21">21&#160;</span>As for me, this <span class='add'>is</span> my covenant with them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; My spirit that <span class='add'>is</span> upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed’s seed, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, from henceforth and for ever.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS60_0'> 60</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_1">1&#160;</span> Arise, <a href='#FN790' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is risen upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_2">2&#160;</span> For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_3">3&#160;</span> And the <a href='#FN791' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN792' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at <span class='add'>thy</span> side.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_5">5&#160;</span> Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the <a href='#FN793' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the <a href='#FN794' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_6">6&#160;</span> The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring <a href='#FN795' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_7">7&#160;</span> All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_8">8&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>are</span> these <span class='add'>that</span> fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_9">9&#160;</span> Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, <a href='#FN796' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_10">10&#160;</span> And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore thy gates <a href='#FN797' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that <span class='add'>men</span> may bring unto thee the <a href='#FN798' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>forces of the Gentiles, and <span class='add'>that</span> their kings <span class='add'>may be</span> brought.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_12">12&#160;</span> For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish; yea, <span class='add'>those</span> nations shall be utterly wasted.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_13">13&#160;</span> The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_14">14&#160;</span> The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall <a href='#FN799' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_15">15&#160;</span> Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through <span class='add'>thee</span>, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_16">16&#160;</span> Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>am</span> thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_17">17&#160;</span> For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_18">18&#160;</span> Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN800' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_20">20&#160;</span> Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_21">21&#160;</span> Thy people also <span class='add'>shall be</span> all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.
<span class="verse" id="IS60_22">22&#160;</span> A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will hasten it in his time.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS61_0'> 61</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_1">1&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN801' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Spirit of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> upon me; because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to <span class='add'>them that are</span> bound;
<span class="verse" id="IS61_2">2&#160;</span> To proclaim the acceptable year of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;
<span class="verse" id="IS61_3">3&#160;</span> To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he might be glorified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And they shall <a href='#FN802' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.
<span class="verse" id="IS61_5">5&#160;</span> And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of the alien <span class='add'>shall be</span> your plowmen and your vinedressers.
<span class="verse" id="IS61_6">6&#160;</span> But ye shall be named the Priests of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>men</span> shall call you the Ministers of our God: <a href='#FN803' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_7">7&#160;</span>¶ For your shame <span class='add'>ye shall have</span> double; and <span class='add'>for</span> confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.
<span class="verse" id="IS61_8">8&#160;</span> For I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
<span class="verse" id="IS61_9">9&#160;</span> And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they <span class='add'>are</span> the seed <span class='add'>which</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_10">10&#160;</span> I will greatly rejoice in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom <a href='#FN804' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>decketh <span class='add'>himself</span> with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth <span class='add'>herself</span> with her jewels.
<span class="verse" id="IS61_11">11&#160;</span> For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS62_0'> 62</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_1">1&#160;</span> For Zion’s sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp <span class='add'>that</span> burneth.
<span class="verse" id="IS62_2">2&#160;</span> And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall name.
<span class="verse" id="IS62_3">3&#160;</span> Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
<span class="verse" id="IS62_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN805' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called <a href='#FN806' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hephzi-bah, and thy land <a href='#FN807' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beulah: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be married.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_5">5&#160;</span>¶ For <span class='add'>as</span> a young man marrieth a virgin, <span class='add'>so</span> shall thy sons marry thee: and <a href='#FN808' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>as</span> the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, <span class='add'>so</span> shall thy God rejoice over thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_6">6&#160;</span> I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, <span class='add'>which</span> shall never hold their peace day nor night: <a href='#FN809' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ye that make mention of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, keep not silence,<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_7">7&#160;</span> And give him no <a href='#FN810' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
<span class="verse" id="IS62_8">8&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, <a href='#FN811' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Surely I will no more give thy corn <span class='add'>to be</span> meat for thine enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured:
<span class="verse" id="IS62_9">9&#160;</span> But they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they that have brought it together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Go through, go through the gates; <a href='#FN812' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.
<span class="verse" id="IS62_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, <a href='#FN813' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his <a href='#FN814' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>reward <span class='add'>is</span> with him, and his <a href='#FN815' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>work before him.
<span class="verse" id="IS62_12">12&#160;</span> And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS63_0'> 63</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_1">1&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this <span class='add'>that is</span> <a href='#FN816' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_2">2&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN817' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>art thou</span> red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat?
<span class="verse" id="IS63_3">3&#160;</span> I have trodden the winepress alone; and of the people <span class='add'>there was</span> none with me: for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_4">4&#160;</span> For the <a href='#FN818' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>day of vengeance <span class='add'>is</span> in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_5">5&#160;</span> And I looked, and <span class='add'>there was</span> none to help; and I wondered that <span class='add'>there was</span> none to uphold: therefore mine own <a href='#FN819' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_6">6&#160;</span> And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_7">7&#160;</span>¶ I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> the praises of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his lovingkindnesses.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_8">8&#160;</span> For he said, Surely they <span class='add'>are</span> my people, children <span class='add'>that</span> will not lie: so he was their Saviour.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_9">9&#160;</span> In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: <a href='#FN820' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_10">10&#160;</span>¶ But they <a href='#FN821' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, <span class='add'>and</span> he fought against them.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_11">11&#160;</span> Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, <span class='add'>and</span> his people, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Where <span class='add'>is</span> he that <a href='#FN822' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>brought them up out of the sea with the <a href='#FN823' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shepherd of his flock? where <span class='add'>is</span> he that put his holy Spirit within him?
<span class="verse" id="IS63_12">12&#160;</span> That led <span class='add'>them</span> by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, <a href='#FN824' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name?
<span class="verse" id="IS63_13">13&#160;</span> That led them through the deep, as an horse in the wilderness, <span class='add'>that</span> they should not stumble?
<span class="verse" id="IS63_14">14&#160;</span> As a beast goeth down into the valley, the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_15">15&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN825' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where <span class='add'>is</span> thy zeal and thy strength, <a href='#FN826' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained?
<span class="verse" id="IS63_16">16&#160;</span> Doubtless thou <span class='add'>art</span> our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>art</span> our father, <a href='#FN827' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>our redeemer; thy name <span class='add'>is</span> from everlasting.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_17">17&#160;</span>¶ O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, <span class='add'>and</span> hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants’ sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_18">18&#160;</span> The people of thy holiness have possessed <span class='add'>it</span> but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.
<span class="verse" id="IS63_19">19&#160;</span>We are <span class='add'>thine:</span> thou never barest rule over them; <a href='#FN828' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>they were not called by thy name.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS64_0'> 64</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_1">1&#160;</span> Oh that thou wouldest <a href='#FN829' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence,
<span class="verse" id="IS64_2">2&#160;</span>As <span class='add'>when</span> <a href='#FN830' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, <span class='add'>that</span> the nations may tremble at thy presence!
<span class="verse" id="IS64_3">3&#160;</span> When thou didst terrible things <span class='add'>which</span> we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_4">4&#160;</span> For since the beginning of the world <a href='#FN831' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>men</span> have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye <a href='#FN832' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seen, O God, beside thee, <span class='add'>what</span> he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_5">5&#160;</span> Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, <span class='add'>those that</span> remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_6">6&#160;</span> But we are all as an unclean <span class='add'>thing</span>, and all our righteousnesses <span class='add'>are</span> as filthy rags; and we all do <a href='#FN833' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there is</span> none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast <a href='#FN834' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consumed us, because of our iniquities.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_8">8&#160;</span> But now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou <span class='add'>art</span> our father; we <span class='add'>are</span> the clay, and thou our potter; and we all <span class='add'>are</span> the work of thy hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Be not <a href='#FN835' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wroth very sore, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we <span class='add'>are</span> all thy people.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_10">10&#160;</span> Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_11">11&#160;</span> Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid waste.
<span class="verse" id="IS64_12">12&#160;</span> Wilt thou refrain thyself for these <span class='add'>things</span>, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS65_0'> 65</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_1">1&#160;</span> I <a href='#FN836' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>am sought of <span class='add'>them that</span> asked not <span class='add'>for me;</span> I am found of <span class='add'>them that</span> sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation <span class='add'>that</span> was not called by my name.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_2">2&#160;</span> I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way <span class='add'>that was</span> not good, after their own thoughts;
<span class="verse" id="IS65_3">3&#160;</span> A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense <a href='#FN837' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>upon altars of brick;
<span class="verse" id="IS65_4">4&#160;</span> Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat swine’s flesh, and <a href='#FN838' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>broth of abominable <span class='add'>things is in</span> their vessels;
<span class="verse" id="IS65_5">5&#160;</span> Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. These <span class='add'>are</span> a smoke in my <a href='#FN839' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>nose, a fire that burneth all the day.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_6">6&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>it is</span> written before me: I will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom,
<span class="verse" id="IS65_7">7&#160;</span> Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and <span class='add'>one</span> saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing <span class='add'>is</span> in it: so will I do for my servants’ sakes, that I may not destroy them all.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_9">9&#160;</span> And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_10">10&#160;</span> And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_11">11&#160;</span>¶ But ye <span class='add'>are</span> they that forsake the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that <a href='#FN840' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>troop, and that furnish the drink offering unto that <a href='#FN841' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>number.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: <a href='#FN842' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because when I called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose <span class='add'>that</span> wherein I delighted not.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:
<span class="verse" id="IS65_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for <a href='#FN843' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vexation of spirit.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_15">15&#160;</span> And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name:
<span class="verse" id="IS65_16">16&#160;</span> That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_17">17&#160;</span>¶ For, behold, I create <a href='#FN844' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor <a href='#FN845' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>come into mind.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_18">18&#160;</span> But be ye glad and rejoice for ever <span class='add'>in that</span> which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_19">19&#160;</span> And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the <a href='#FN846' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_20">20&#160;</span> There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner <span class='add'>being</span> an hundred years old shall be accursed.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_21">21&#160;</span> And they shall build houses, and inhabit <span class='add'>them;</span> and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_22">22&#160;</span> They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree <span class='add'>are</span> the days of my people, and mine elect <a href='#FN847' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_23">23&#160;</span> They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they <span class='add'>are</span> the seed of the blessed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and their offspring with them.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_24">24&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, that <a href='#FN848' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
<span class="verse" id="IS65_25">25&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN849' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust <span class='add'>shall be</span> the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS66_0'> 66</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN850' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The heaven <span class='add'>is</span> my throne, and the earth <span class='add'>is</span> my footstool: where <span class='add'>is</span> the house that ye build unto me? and where <span class='add'>is</span> the place of my rest?
<span class="verse" id="IS66_2">2&#160;</span>For all those <span class='add'>things</span> hath mine hand made, and all those <span class='add'>things</span> have been, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but to this <span class='add'>man</span> will I look, <span class='add'>even</span> to <span class='add'>him that is</span> poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_3">3&#160;</span> He that killeth an ox <span class='add'>is as if</span> he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a <a href='#FN851' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamb, <span class='add'>as if</span> he cut off a dog’s neck; he that offereth an oblation, <span class='add'>as if he offered</span> swine’s blood; he that <a href='#FN852' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>burneth incense, <span class='add'>as if</span> he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_4">4&#160;</span> I also will choose their <a href='#FN853' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>delusions, and will bring their fears upon them; <a href='#FN854' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose <span class='add'>that</span> in which I delighted not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name’s sake, said, <a href='#FN855' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_6">6&#160;</span> A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that rendereth recompence to his enemies.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_7">7&#160;</span> Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_8">8&#160;</span> Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? <span class='add'>or</span> shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_9">9&#160;</span> Shall I bring to the birth, and not <a href='#FN856' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cause to bring forth? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut <span class='add'>the womb</span>? saith thy God.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_10">10&#160;</span> Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her:
<span class="verse" id="IS66_11">11&#160;</span> That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the <a href='#FN857' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abundance of her glory.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_12">12&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be <a href='#FN858' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>borne upon <span class='add'>her</span> sides, and be dandled upon <span class='add'>her</span> knees.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_13">13&#160;</span> As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_14">14&#160;</span> And when ye see <span class='add'>this</span>, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be known toward his servants, and <span class='add'>his</span> indignation toward his enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_15">15&#160;</span> For, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_16">16&#160;</span> For by fire and by his sword will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> plead with all flesh: and the slain of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be many.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_17">17&#160;</span> They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens <a href='#FN859' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>behind one <span class='add'>tree</span> in the midst, eating swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_18">18&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>know</span> their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my glory.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_19">19&#160;</span> And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, <span class='add'>to</span> Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, <span class='add'>to</span> Tubal, and Javan, <span class='add'>to</span> the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_20">20&#160;</span> And they shall bring all your brethren <span class='add'>for</span> an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in <a href='#FN860' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_21">21&#160;</span> And I will also take of them for <a href='#FN861' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>priests <span class='add'>and</span> for Levites, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_22">22&#160;</span> For as the <a href='#FN862' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, so shall your seed and your name remain.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_23">23&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN863' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="IS66_24">24&#160;</span> And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their <a href='#FN864' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_1'>32 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_7'>8. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of heaviness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. alienated, or, separated.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. increase revolt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, oil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 28. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_51'>51</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_52'>52</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_5'>5. 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as the overthrow of strangers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Lam <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM3_22'>3. 22</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_29'>9. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>19. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_8'>15 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_27'>21 27</a>. ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_3'>66. 3</a> Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_20'>6. 20</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_21'>5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. great he goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to be seen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grief.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_28'>1. 28</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_12'>14. 12</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC3_4'>3. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiply prayer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_3'>59 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_11'>3. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, righten.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_28'>5. 28</a> Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to pureness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they that return of her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_3'>31. 3</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_6'>1 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS5_6'>5 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_27'>73 27</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS92_9'>92 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_35'>104. 35</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breaking.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and his work.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_1'>4. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prepared.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, scythes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, more than the east.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, abound with the children, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_15'>5. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pictures of desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the idols shall utterly pass away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS10_8'>10. 8</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_30'>23. 30</a>. Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_16'>6 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_6'>9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the dust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the idols of his silver, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS2_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, which they made for him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man eminent in countenance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, skilful of speech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_16'>10. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lift up the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. binder up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_13'>13. 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_21'>18. 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_5'>19. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb done to him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they which call thee blessed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. swallow up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, burnt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. deceiving with their eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, tripping nicely.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make naked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, networks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sweet balls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spangled ornaments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb houses of the soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. might.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, emptied.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cleansed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. let thy name be called upon us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, take thou away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. beauty and glory.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the escaping of Israel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, above.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS4_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a covering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_21'>2. 21</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_33'>21. 33</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_1'>12. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_9'>20. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the horn of the son of oil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, made a wall about it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hewed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for a treading.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. plant of his pleasures.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a scab.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC2_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, This is in mine ears, saith <span class="add">the <span class="nd">Lord,</span></span> &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. If not, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. 23. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_29'>29</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pursue them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. their glory are men of famine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 2. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_9'>9</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_11'>11</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the holy God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the God the holy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that say concerning evil, It is good, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_7'>3. 7</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_16'>12. 16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before their face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_15'>17 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the tongue of fire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as dung.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 9. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_12'>12</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_17'>17</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_21'>21</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_4'>10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, distress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when it is light, it shall be dark in the destructions thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_41'>12. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the skirts thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. this cried to this</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV4_8'>4 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his glory is the fulness of the whole earth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thresholds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and in his hand a live coal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. caused it to touch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_26'>1. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 I said]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Behold me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_14'>13. 14</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_12'>4. 12</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_10'>8. 10</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_40'>12. 40</a> Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC28_26'>28. 26</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_8'>11. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, without ceasing, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hear ye in hearing, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desolate with desolation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when it is returned, and hath been broused.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS6_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, stock, or, stem.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K216_5'>16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. resteth on Ephraim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, the remnant shall return.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_17'>18 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, causeway.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. let not thy heart be tender.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, waken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from a people</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Do ye not believe? it is because ye are not stable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">And the <span class="nd">Lord</span> added to speak.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, make thy petition deep.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_23'>1. 23</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_31'>1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thou, O Virgin, shalt call.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, commendable trees.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_35'>19. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the midst of the land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in making speed to the spoil he hasteneth the prey, or, make speed, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. approached unto.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he that is before the king of Assyria shall take away the riches, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fulness of the breadth of thy land shall be the stretchings out of his wings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, yet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb in strength of hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_16'>28 16</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_34'>2. 34</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_33'>9. 33</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_8'>2 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_44'>21. 44</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_18'>20. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB2_13'>2. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_29'>16. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. no morning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, populous</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_16'>4. 16</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_14'>5. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, When thou brakest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_22'>7. 22</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_26'>10. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, When the whole battle of the warrior was, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and it was, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. meat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_16'>3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke 1. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_32'>32</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_31'>19 31</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS37_32'>37. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mingle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with whole mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_25'>5 25</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_4'>10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they that call them blessed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they that are called blessed of them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. swallowed up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, villany.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. meat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS9_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to the writers that write grievousness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_25'>5 25</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_12'>9. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Woe to the Assyrian.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Asshur.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, though.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to lay them a treading.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. 18. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_24'>24</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_33'>33</a>. &amp;c <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_10'>19. 10</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_31'>19 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb visit upon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb of the greatness of the heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, like many people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as if a rod should shake them that lift it up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that which is not wood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the soul and even to the flesh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. number.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_27'>9 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in, or, amongst</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_22'>28 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_22'>28. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, but he shall lift up his staff for thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Exod. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_0'>14.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_25'>7. 25</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_4'>9. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall remove.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Cry shrill with thy voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_34"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 forests]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS10_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mightily.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_23'>13. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. scent or, smell.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, argue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_9'>4 9</a>. 2 Thess. <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_8'>2. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_25'>65. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, adder's.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_12'>15 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. glory.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the children of the east.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Edom and Moab shall be the laying on of their hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the children of Ammon their obedience.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in shoes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>14 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS12_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_2'>15. 2</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_14'>118. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS12_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R116_8'>16. 8</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_1'>105. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS12_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, proclaim his name.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS12_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. inhabitress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the likeness of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fall down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb wonder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. every man at his neighbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. faces of the flames</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_7'>32 7</a> Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_31'>2. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_15'>3. 15</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_29'>24 29</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_24'>13. 24</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_25'>21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS137_9'>137. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as the overthrowing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>19. 24</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR50_40'>50. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ziim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ochim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ostriches.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. daughters of the owl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ochim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS13_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, palaces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb that had taken them captives.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, taunting speech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, exactress of gold.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a stroke without removing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The grave.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. leaders.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, great goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, O day star.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, did not let his prisoners loose homeward.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_19'>18. 19</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS21_10'>21. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_28'>37. 28</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS109_13'>109. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_5'>20. 5</a> Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_35'>23. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_6'>20. 6</a>. Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_12'>9. 12</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_30'>21. 30</a>. Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_32'>4. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, adder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he shall not be alone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, assemblies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 87. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS87_1'>1</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS87_5'>5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_16'>102 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, betake themselves unto it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. 48. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_37'>37</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_38'>38</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK7_18'>7. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. descending into weeping: or, coming down with weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to the borders thereof, even to Zoar, as an heifer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. 48. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_5'>5</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breaking.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desolations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valley of the Arabians.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS15_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. additions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Petra.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A rock.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a nest forsaken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Bring.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wringer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the treaders down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. 7. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_14'>14</a>, <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_27'>27</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_7'>4. 7</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prepared.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_29'>48. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_20'>48. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, mutter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, plucked up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the alarm is fallen upon, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_33'>48. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS16_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, not many.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS17_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sun images.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS17_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, removed in the day of inheritance, and there shall be deadly sorrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS17_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, noise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS17_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, many.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS17_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thistle-down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, outspread and polished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a nation that meteth out, and treadeth down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a nation of line, line, and treading under foot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, whose land the rivers despise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, regard my set dwelling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, after rain.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS18_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, outspread and polished, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mingle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall be emptied.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb swallow up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shut up</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and shall not be.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, white works.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. foundations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of living things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, governors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. corners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a spirit of perversities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS19_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of Heres, or, of the sun.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS20_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of Isaiah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS20_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the captivity of Egypt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS20_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. nakedness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS20_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, country.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, My mind wandered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. put.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cried as a lion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Hab. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK2_1'>2 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, every night.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_8'>51. 8</a> Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_8'>14. 8</a> &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_2'>18 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. son.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bring ye</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for fear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS21_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bows.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of the bow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_19'>4. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR9_1'>9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I will be bitter in weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made naked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the choice of thy valleys.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, towards.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_12'>56. 12</a>. Wisd <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_6'>2. 6</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_32'>15. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, O he.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ver <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS22_18'>18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the captivity of a man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. large of spaces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_14'>12. 14</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_7'>3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS22_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, instruments of viols.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. silent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from afar off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to pollute.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. girdle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, concerning a merchantman.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Canaan.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, strengths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it shall be unto Tyre as the song of an harlot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS23_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. old.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. perverteth the face thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS4_9'>4 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the height of the people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_84'>7. 84</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_9'>16 9</a> &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_10'>25 10</a>. Ezek <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK26_13'>26. 13</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_11'>2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valleys.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Leanness to me, or, My secret to me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. 48. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_43'>43</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_44'>44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visit upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with the gathering of prisoners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dungeon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, found wanting.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_10'>13. 10</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_7'>32 7</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_31'>2. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_15'>3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS24_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, there shall be glory before his ancients.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. swallow up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. covered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.8</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_54'>15 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_17'>7. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_4'>21. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, threshed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, threshed in Madmenah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. truths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. peace, peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thought, or, imagination.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the rock of ages.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, towards thy people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. secret speech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS26_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS27_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, crossing like a bar.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS27_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, march against.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS27_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to the stroke of those.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS27_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when thou sendest it forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS27_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when he removeth it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS27_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sun images.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28.4</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 seeth it]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. swalloweth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the hearing?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hath been.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stammerings of lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C114_21'>14. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he hath spoken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_22'>118. 22</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_42'>21. 42</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC4_11'>4. 11</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_33'>9. 33</a>. &amp;c <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_11'>10 11</a>. 1 Pet. 2. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_6'>6</a>, <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_7'>7</a>, <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a treading down to it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when he shall make you to understand doctrine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.21</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_20'>5 20</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R114_11'>14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. 10. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_10'>10</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_12'>12</a>. 2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_25'>5. 25</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R114_16'>14. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the wheat in the principal place, and barley in the appointed place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spelt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. border?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, And he bindeth it in such sort as his God doth teach him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, O Ariel, that is, the lion of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of the city.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cut off the heads.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. peep or, chirp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, take your pleasure, and riot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heads.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, letter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_8'>15 8</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I will add.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR49_7'>49. 7</a>. Obad <a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_8'>8</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C11_19'>1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_18'>23. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_9'>45. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb shall add.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall know understanding.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the latter day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fraud.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the bottle of potters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a tree bereft of branches, or, boughs. or, a mast.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_12'>2 12</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_8'>34. 8</a>. Prov <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_20'>16. 20</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, oppression.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the graven images of thy silver.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. scatter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, savoury.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. leavoned.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lifted up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and the grievousness of flame</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heaviness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Rock.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the glory of his voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. every passing of the rod founded.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cause to rest upon him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS30_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from yesterday.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. remove.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, multitude.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_20'>2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the idols of his gold.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for fear of the sword.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, tributary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for melting, or, tribute.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his rock shall pass away for fear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS31_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, his strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heavy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hasty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, elegantly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when he speaketh against the poor in judgment.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, be established.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Days above a year.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fields of desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, burning upon, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, clifts and watch-towers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_17'>29. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS32_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and the city shall be utterly abased.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. salvations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, messengers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, withered away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS15_2'>15. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_4'>24. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb in righteousnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. uprightnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, deceits.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heights, or, high places.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the land of far distances.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.18</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C11_20'>1. 20</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weigher?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ridiculous</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broad of spaces, or, hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. statutemaker.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS33_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, They have forsaken thy tacklings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fulness thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_14'>6. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_13'>6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, rhinocerots.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, drunken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_4'>63. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_18'>18. 18</a> &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_3'>19 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP2_14'>2. 14</a>. Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_2'>18 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 34.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 The]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pelican.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ostriches.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. daughters of the owl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Zum.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ijim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, nightmonster.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_12'>12. 12</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hasty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_27'>9. 27</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_5'>11. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_22'>12. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_30'>20. 30</a> &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_14'>21. 14</a>. John 9. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_6'>6</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_5'>11 5</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_32'>7. 32</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_5'>11. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_30'>15. 30</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_14'>21. 14</a>. John 5. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_8'>8</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_9'>9</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_2'>3. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC8_7'>8. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_8'>14. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_33'>9. 33</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_22'>12. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_30'>15. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.6</a>
 <span class="ft">John 7. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_38'>38</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_39'>39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a court for reeds, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for he shall be with them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS35_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_11'>51. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_13'>18. 13</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R232_1'>32. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, secretary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a word of lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, but counsel and strength are for the war.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. 29. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK29_6'>6</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK29_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hostages</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Seek my favour by a present.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS36_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Make with me a blessing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_1'>19. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, provocation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, put a spirit into him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. given.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. By the hand of thy servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the tallness of the cedars thereof, and the choice of the fir trees thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the forest and his fruitful field.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fenced and closed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Hast thou not heard how I have made it long ago, and formed it of ancient times? should I now bring it to be laid waste, and defenced cities to be ruinous heaps?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. short of hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 37.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sitting.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the escaping of the house of Judah that remaineth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the escaping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.32</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_31'>19. 31</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_7'>9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.35</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_6'>20. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.36</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_35'>19. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS37_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ararat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_1'>20. 1</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R232_24'>32. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Give charge concerning thy house.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with great weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. degrees by, or, with the sun.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from the thrum.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ease me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, on my peace came great bitterness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thou hast loved my soul from the pit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS39_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.1</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_12'>20. 12</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS39_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 39.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spicery.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS39_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 39.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, jewels.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS39_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vessels, or, instruments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to the heart,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, appointed time.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_3'>3 3</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_3'>1. 3</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_4'>3 4</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_23'>1. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a straight place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a plain place.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_2'>14. 2</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_11'>102. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS108_15'>108 15</a>. James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_10'>1 10</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_24'>1. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.8</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_34'>12. 34</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_25'>1. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, O thou that tellest good tidings to Zion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, O thou that tellest good tidings to Jerusalem.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against the strong.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_11'>62. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, recompence for his work.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK34_23'>34 23</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_11'>10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that give suck.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a tierce.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_13'>9. 13</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_34'>11. 34</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_16'>2. 16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. man of his counsel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made him understand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. understandings?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_35'>4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC17_29'>17. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is poor of oblation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Him that sitteth, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_2'>104. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_21'>12. 21</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_40'>107. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_5'>147. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS40_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. change.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. righteousness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_10'>43. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_6'>44. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_12'>48. 12</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_17'>1. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_13'>22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb Be strong.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, founder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the [Editor: illegible word]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, saying of the soder, It is good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_6'>7. 6</a>. &amp;c &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_15'>10. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT14_2'>14. 2</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_4'>135. 4</a>. ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_1'>43 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_1'>44. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_7'>20. 7</a>. James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_22'>23. 22</a> ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_12'>60. 12</a>. Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC12_3'>12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the men of thy strife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the men of thy contention.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the men of thy war.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, few men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_7'>35. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_3'>44. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_35'>107. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Cause to come near.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. set our heart upon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, worse than nothing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, worse than of a viper.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS41_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. return.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_18'>12 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_17'>3 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT17_5'>17. 5</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 42.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dimly burning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. quench it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_6'>49. 6</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_32'>2. 32</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_47'>13. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_1'>61. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_18'>4. 18</a>. Heb. 2. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB2_14'>14</a>, <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB2_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_2'>9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_11'>48. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the fulness thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 42.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, behave himself mightily.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb swallow, or, sup up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. into straightness</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS97_7'>97 7</a> ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_29'>1. 29</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_11'>44 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_16'>45 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_21'>2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 42.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 42.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in snaring all the young men of them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a treading.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS42_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the after time?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 43.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, person.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_2'>44. 2</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_10'>30. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR46_27'>46. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_21'>41. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_4'>41 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_8'>44. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 43.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, nothing formed of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_21'>45. 21</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS13_4'>13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. turn it back?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_12'>9. 12</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS14_27'>14. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bars.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 14. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_16'>16</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. 3. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_13'>13</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.19</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_17'>5 17</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_5'>21. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 43.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ostriches.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. daughters of the owl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke 1. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_74'>74</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_75'>75</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lambs. or, kids.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made me drunk, or, abundantly moistened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK36_22'>36. 22</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 43.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. interpreters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS43_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 43.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, holy princes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_8'>41. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_1'>43 1</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_10'>30. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR46_27'>46. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_7'>35. 7</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_28'>2. 28</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_38'>7. 38</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_18'>2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_4'>41 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_12'>48. 12</a>. Rev. 1. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_8'>8</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_17'>17</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_13'>22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_5'>45. 5</a>. Deut 4. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_35'>35</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_39'>39</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_39'>32. 39</a>. 1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rock.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_4'>115. 4</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS97_7'>97. 7</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_29'>1. 29</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_17'>42. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_16'>45. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_3'>10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 44.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with an axe.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 44.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, taketh courage.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. daubed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. setteth to his heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that which comes of a tree?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_20"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 44.20</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 of]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 44.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wastes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS44_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.28</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_22'>36 22</a> Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_1'>1. 1</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_13'>45. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 45.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, strengthened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 4. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_35'>35</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_39'>39</a> &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_39'>32. 39</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_8'>44. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_6'>18. 6</a>. Rom <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_20'>9. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 45.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, make straight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.13</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_22'>36 22</a>. Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_1'>1. 1</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_28'>44. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_11'>44. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_11'>30. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_11'>14 11</a> Phil. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_10'>2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 45.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">Surely he shall say of me, In the <span class="nd">Lord</span></span> is all righteousness and strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 45.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. righteousnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS46_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 46.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. their soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN625"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS46_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 40. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_18'>18</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN626"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS46_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_11'>33. 11</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_21'>19. 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_30'>21. 30</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB6_17'>6. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN627"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS46_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 46.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the man of my counsel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN628"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 47.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN629"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_7'>18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN630"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_19'>51. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN631"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 47.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, caused thee to turn away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN632"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the morning thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN633"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. expiate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN634"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. viewers of the heavens.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN635"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that give knowledge concerning the months.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN636"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS47_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 47.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. their souls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN637"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 48.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN638"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 48.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for silver.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN639"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_8'>42. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN640"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_4'>41. 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_6'>44. 6</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_17'>1 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_13'>22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN641"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 48.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the palm of my right hand hath spread out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN642"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 19. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_4'>4</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_5'>5</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN643"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_6'>17. 6</a>. Num <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_11'>20. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN644"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS48_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_21'>57. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN645"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, my reward.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN646"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, That Israel may be gathered to him, and I may, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN647"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Art thou lighter than that thou shouldest, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN648"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, desolations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN649"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_6'>42. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN650"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to him that is despised in soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN651"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.8</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_2'>6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN652"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, raise up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN653"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_7'>42. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN654"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_16'>7. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN655"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 49.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 heaven]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN656"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 49.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 God]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN657"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from having compassion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN658"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_4'>60. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN659"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bosom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN660"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb nourishers</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN661"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. princesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN662"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_9'>72. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN663"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the captivity of the just.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN664"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. captivity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN665"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_20'>14. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV16_6'>16. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN666"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS49_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 49.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, new wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN667"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_23'>11. 23</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_1'>59. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN668"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>14. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN669"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_16'>3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN670"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_28'>11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN671"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.5</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN14_31'>14. 31</a> Phil. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_8'>2. 8</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_5'>10. 5</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN672"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_67'>26 67</a> &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_26'>27. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN673"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. 8 <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_32'>32</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN674"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 50.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the master of my cause?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN675"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS50_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.11</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_39'>9. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN676"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_26'>102. 26</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_35'>24. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN677"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_31'>37. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN678"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN679"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 74. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_13'>13</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_14'>14</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK29_3'>29. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN680"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>14. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN681"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_10'>35. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN682"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_6'>118. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN683"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_6'>40. 6</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_24'>1. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN684"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 51.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, made himself ready.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN685"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_35'>31. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN686"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 49. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_2'>2</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN687"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_1'>52. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN688"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_9'>47. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN689"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 51.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. happened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN690"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS51_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 51.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breaking.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN691"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_17'>51. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN692"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_6'>46. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN693"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. 36 <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK36_20'>20</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK36_23'>23</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_24'>2 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN694"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Nah. <a href='NAM.xhtml#NM1_15'>1. 15</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_15'>10. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN695"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS98_3'>98 3</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_6'>3 6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN696"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_17'>6 17</a> Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_4'>18 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN697"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 52.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gather you up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN698"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 52.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or prosper</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN699"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_3'>53. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN700"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_21'>15 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN701"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.1</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_38'>12 38</a> Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_16'>10. 16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN702"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 53.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, doctrine</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN703"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 53.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb hearing</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN704"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_14'>52. 14</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_12'>9 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN705"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 53.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he hid as it were his face from us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN706"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 53.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as a hiding of faces from him, or, from us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN707"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_17'>3 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN708"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 53.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, tormented.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN709"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_25'>4. 25</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_3'>15. 3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN710"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_24'>2 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN711"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 53.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bruise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN712"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 53.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hath made the iniquity of us all to meet on him</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN713"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_63'>26. 63</a> &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_12'>27. 12</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_61'>14. 61</a>. &amp;c <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_5'>15. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN714"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC8_32'>8. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN715"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 53.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He was taken away by distress and judgment: but, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN716"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 53.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was the stroke upon him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN717"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 53.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. deaths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN718"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.9</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_22'>2. 22</a>. 1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN3_5'>3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN719"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 53.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when his soul shall make an offering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN720"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_28'>15. 28</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_37'>22 37</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN721"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_34'>23. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN722"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS54_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 54.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL4_27'>4. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN723"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS54_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 54.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_32'>1. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN724"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS54_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 54.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_11'>9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN725"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS54_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 54.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_2'>29. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN726"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS54_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 54.13</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_45'>6. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN727"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS55_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 55.1</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_37'>7. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN728"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS55_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 55.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weigh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN729"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS55_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 55.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_34'>13. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN730"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS55_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 55.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the man of iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN731"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS55_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 55.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he will multiply to pardon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN732"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS55_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 55.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_1'>35. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN733"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 56.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, equity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN734"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 56.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN735"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 56.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_13'>21. 13</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_17'>11. 17</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_46'>19. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN736"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 56.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to his gathered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN737"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 56.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dreaming, or, talking in their sleep.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN738"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 56.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strong of appetite.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN739"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS56_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 56.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. know not to be satisfied.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN740"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 57.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men of kindness, or, godliness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN741"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 57.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS12_1'>12. 1</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC7_2'>7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN742"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, from that which is evil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN743"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, go in peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN744"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, before him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN745"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, among the oaks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN746"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 57.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K216_4'>16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN747"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hewed it for thyself larger than theirs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN748"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 57.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits thee]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN749"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thou providedst room.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN750"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thou respectedst the king.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN751"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 57.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, living.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN752"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 57.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_3'>40. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_10'>62. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN753"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 57.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. turning away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN754"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 57.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_22'>48. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN755"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with the throat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN756"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 58.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, things wherewith ye grieve others.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN757"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. griefs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN758"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 58.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ye fast not as this day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN759"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 58.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC7_5'>7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN760"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 58.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV16_29'>16. 29</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN761"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 58.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to afflict his soul for a day?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN762"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the bundles of the yoke.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN763"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN764"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 58.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_7'>18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN765"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 58.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, afflicted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN766"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall gather thee up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN767"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. droughts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN768"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 58.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lie, or, deceive.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN769"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 58.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_4'>61. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN770"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS58_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 58.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_13'>32. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN771"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_23'>11. 23</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS50_2'>50. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN772"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 59.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, have made him hide.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN773"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_15'>1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN774"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_35'>15. 35</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_14'>7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN775"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 59.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, adders'.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN776"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 59.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that which is sprinkled is as if there brake out a viper.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN777"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Job 8. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_14'>14</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN778"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_16'>1. 16</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_15'>3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN779"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 59.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breaking.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN780"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 59.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, right.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN781"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 59.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, is accounted mad.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN782"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 59.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it was evil in his eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN783"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_5'>63. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN784"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_17'>6. 17</a>. 1 Thess. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_8'>5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN785"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_6'>63. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN786"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 59.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. recompences.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN787"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV12_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN788"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 59.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, put him to flight.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN789"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS59_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 59.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_26'>11. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN790"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 60.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, be enlightened; for thy light cometh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN791"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_24'>21. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN792"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_18'>49. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN793"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 60.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, noise of the sea shall be turned toward thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN794"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 60.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wealth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN795"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_6'>61. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN796"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL4_26'>4. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN797"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_26'>21. 26</a>;</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN798"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 60.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wealth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN799"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN800"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS60_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 60.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_23'>21. 23</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_5'>22. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN801"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS61_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 61.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_18'>4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN802"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS61_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 61.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_12'>58. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN803"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS61_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 61.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_6'>60. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN804"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS61_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 61.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. decketh as a priest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN805"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 62.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS1_10'>1. 10</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_10'>2. 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN806"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 62.4</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, My delight is in her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN807"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 62.4</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Married.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN808"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 62.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb with the joy of the bridegroom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN809"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 62.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">ye that are the <span class="nd">Lord's</span> remembrancers.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN810"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 62.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. silence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN811"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 62.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb If I give, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN812"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 62.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_3'>40. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_14'>57. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN813"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 62.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_9'>9. 9</a> Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_5'>21. 5</a> John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN814"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 62.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_10'>40. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN815"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 62.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, recompence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN816"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 63.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. decked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN817"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_13'>19. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN818"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_8'>34. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN819"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_16'>59. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN820"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 7. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_7'>7</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN821"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_24'>15 24</a>. Num <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_11'>14 11</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_56'>78. 56</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS95_9'>95. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN822"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_30'>14. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN823"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 63.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS77_20'>77. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN824"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>14. 21</a> Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_16'>3. 16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN825"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 63.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_15'>26 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN826"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 63.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the multitude.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN827"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 63.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, our redeemer from everlasting is thy name.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN828"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS63_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 63.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thy name was not called upon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN829"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 64.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 rent]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN830"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 64.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fire of meltings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN831"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 64.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS31_19'>31. 19</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_9'>2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN832"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 64.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, seen a God beside thee, which doeth so for him, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN833"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 64.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 90. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS90_5'>5</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS90_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN834"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 64.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb melted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN835"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS64_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 64.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_8'>79. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN836"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 65.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. 9. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_24'>24</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_25'>25</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_26'>26</a>. &amp;c <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_20'>10 20</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP2_12'>2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN837"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 65.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon bricks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN838"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 65.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN839"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 65.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, anger.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN840"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 65.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Gad.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN841"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 65.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Meni.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN842"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 65.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_24'>1. 24</a>. &amp;c. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_4'>66 4</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_13'>7. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN843"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 65.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breaking.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN844"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 65.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_22'>66. 22</a>. 2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_13'>3. 13</a>. Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_1'>21. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN845"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 65.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. come upon the heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN846"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 65.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_4'>21. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN847"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 65.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall make them continue long, or, shall wear out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN848"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 65.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS32_5'>32. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN849"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS65_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 65.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 11. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_6'>6</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN850"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.1</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_27'>8. 27</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_18'>6. 18</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_49'>7. 49</a>. &amp;c <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC17_24'>17. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN851"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 66.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, kid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN852"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 66.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. maketh a memorial of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN853"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 66.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, devices.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN854"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_24'>1. 24</a>. ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_12'>65. 12</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_13'>7. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN855"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_19'>5. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN856"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 66.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, beget.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN857"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 66.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, brightness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN858"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_22'>49. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_4'>60. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN859"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 66.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, one after another.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN860"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 66.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, coaches.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN861"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_6'>19 6</a>. ch <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_6'>61 6</a> 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_9'>2. 9</a>. Rev <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN862"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_17'>65. 17</a>. 2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_13'>3. 13</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_1'>21. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN863"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 66.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from new moon to his new moon, and from sabbath to his sabbath.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN864"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS66_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 66.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_44'>9. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
