<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Judith 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Judith</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JT0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Judith  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JT1_1">1&#160;</span>In the twelfth year of the reign of <a href='#FN1'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Nabuchodonosor, who reigned in Nineve, <a href='#FN2'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the great city; in the days of Arphaxad, which reigned over the <a href='#FN3'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Medes in <a href='#FN4'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Ecbatane, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_2">2&#160;</span>And built in Ecbatane walls round about of stones hewn three cubits broad and six cubits long, and made the height of the wall seventy cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_3">3&#160;</span>And set the towers thereof upon the gates of it an hundred cubits high, and the breadth thereof in the foundation threescore cubits: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_4">4&#160;</span>And he made the gates thereof, even gates that were raised to the height of seventy cubits, and the breadth of them was forty cubits, for the going forth of his mighty armies, and for the setting in array of his footmen: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_5">5&#160;</span>Even in those days king Nabuchodonosor made war with king Arphaxad in the great plain, which is the plain in the borders of <a href='#FN5'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Ragau. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_6">6&#160;</span>And there came unto him all they that dwelt in the hill country, and all that dwelt by Euphrates, and <a href='#FN6'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Tigris and Hydaspes, and the plain of Arioch the king of the <a href='#FN7'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Elymeans, and very many nations of the sons of Chelod, assembled themselves to the battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_7">7&#160;</span>Then Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians sent unto all that dwelt in <a href='#FN8'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Persia, and to all that dwelt westward, and to those that dwelt in <a href='#FN9'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Cilicia, and <a href='#FN10'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Damascus, and <a href='#FN11'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Libanus, and Antilibanus, and to all that dwelt upon the sea coast, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_8">8&#160;</span>And to those among the nations that were of <a href='#FN12'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Carmel, and <a href='#FN13'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Galaad, and <a href='#FN14'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the higher Galilee, and the great plain of <a href='#FN15'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Esdrelom, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_9">9&#160;</span>And to all that were in <a href='#FN16'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Samaria and the cities thereof, and beyond Jordan unto Jerusalem, and Betane, and <a href='#FN17'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Chelus, and <a href='#FN18'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Kades, and <a href='#FN19'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the river of Egypt, and Taphnes, and <a href='#FN20'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Ramesse, and all the land of <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Gesem, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_10">10&#160;</span>Until ye come beyond <a href='#FN22'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Tanis and <a href='#FN23'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Memphis, and to all the inhabitants of Egypt, until ye come to the borders of <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Ethiopia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_11">11&#160;</span>But all the inhabitants of the land <a href='#FN25'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>made light of the commandment of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians, neither went they with him to the battle; for they were not afraid of him: yea, he was before them as one man, and they sent away his ambassadors from them without effect, and with disgrace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore Nabuchodonosor was very angry with all this country, and sware by his throne and kingdom, that he would surely be avenged upon all those coasts of <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Cilicia, and <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Damascus, and <a href='#FN28'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Syria, and that he would slay with the sword all the inhabitants of the land of <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Moab, and the children of <a href='#FN30'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Ammon, and all Judea, and all that were in Egypt, till ye come to the borders of <a href='#FN31'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the two seas. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_13">13&#160;</span>Then he marched in battle array with his power against king Arphaxad <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>dd</a>in the seventeenth year, and he prevailed in his battle: for he overthrew all the power of Arphaxad, and all his horsemen, and all his chariots, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_14">14&#160;</span>And became lord of his cities, and came unto <a href='#FN33'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Ecbatane, and took <a href='#FN34'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the towers, and spoiled the streets thereof, and turned the beauty thereof into shame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_15">15&#160;</span>He took also Arphaxad in the mountains of <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Ragau, and smote him through with his darts, and destroyed him utterly that day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT1_16">16&#160;</span>So he returned afterward to Nineve, both he and all his <a href='#FN36'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>company of sundry nations being a very great multitude of men of war, and there he took his ease, and banqueted, both he and his army, an hundred and twenty days.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_1">1&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>in the eighteenth year, the two and twentieth day of the first month, there was talk in the house of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians that he should, <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>as he said, avenge himself on all the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_2">2&#160;</span>So he called unto him all his officers, and all his <a href='#FN39'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>nobles, and communicated with them his secret counsel, and <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>concluded the afflicting of the whole earth out of his own mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_3">3&#160;</span>Then they decreed to destroy all flesh, <a href='#FN41'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>dd</a>that did not obey the commandment of his mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_4">4&#160;</span>And when he had ended his counsel, Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians called Holofernes the chief captain of his army, which was <a href='#FN42'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>next unto him, and said unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_5">5&#160;</span>Thus saith <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the great king, the lord of the whole earth, Behold, thou shalt go forth from my presence, and take with thee men that trust in their own strength, of footmen an hundred and twenty thousand; and the number of horses with their riders twelve thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_6">6&#160;</span>And thou shalt go against all the west country, because <a href='#FN44'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>they disobeyed my commandment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_7">7&#160;</span>And thou shalt declare unto them, that they prepare for me <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>earth and water: for I will go forth in my wrath against them and will cover the whole face of the earth with the feet of mine army, and I will give them for a spoil unto them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_8">8&#160;</span>So that their slain shall fill their valleys and brooks and the river shall be filled with their dead, till it overflow: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_9">9&#160;</span>And I will lead them captives to the utmost parts of all the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_10">10&#160;</span>Thou therefore shalt go forth. and take beforehand for me all their coasts: and if they will yield themselves unto thee, thou shalt reserve them for me till the day of their punishment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_11">11&#160;</span>But concerning them that rebel, <a href='#FN46'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>let not thine eye spare them; but put them to the slaughter, and spoil them wheresoever thou goest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_12">12&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN47'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>as I live, and by the power of my kingdom, whatsoever I have spoken, that will I do by mine hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_13">13&#160;</span>And take thou heed that thou transgress none of the commandments of thy lord, but accomplish them fully, as I have commanded thee, and defer not to do them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_14">14&#160;</span>Then Holofernes went forth from the presence of his lord, and called all the <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>governors and captains, and the officers of the army of Assur; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_15">15&#160;</span>And he mustered the chosen men for the <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>battle, as his lord had commanded him, <a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>unto an hundred and twenty thousand, and twelve thousand archers on horseback; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_16">16&#160;</span>And he ranged them, as a great army is ordered for the war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_17">17&#160;</span>And he took <a href='#FN51'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>jj</a>camels and asses for their <a href='#FN52'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>carriages, a very great number; and sheep and oxen and goats without number for their provision: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_18">18&#160;</span>And plenty of victual for every man of the army, and very much gold and silver out of the king’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_19">19&#160;</span>Then he went forth and all his power to go before king Nabuchodonosor in the voyage, and <a href='#FN53'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>to cover all the face of the earth westward with their chariots, and horsemen, and their chosen footmen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_20">20&#160;</span>A great number also <a href='#FN54'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>sundry countries came with them like <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>locusts, and <a href='#FN56'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>like the sand of the earth: for the multitude was without number. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_21">21&#160;</span>And they went forth of Nineve three days’ journey toward the plain of Bectileth, and pitched from Bectileth near the mountain which is at the left hand of the upper <a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Cilicia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_22">22&#160;</span>Then he took all his army, his footmen, and horsemen and chariots, and went from thence into the hill country; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_23">23&#160;</span>And destroyed <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Phud and <a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Lud, and spoiled all the children of Rasses, and <a href='#FN60'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the children of Israel, which were toward the wilderness at the south of the land of the <a href='#FN61'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Chellians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_24">24&#160;</span>Then he went over Euphrates, and went through <a href='#FN62'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Mesopotamia, and destroyed all the high cities that were upon the river Arbonai, till ye come to the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_25">25&#160;</span>And he took the borders of <a href='#FN63'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Cilicia, and killed all that resisted him, and came to <a href='#FN64'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the borders of Japheth, which were toward the south, over against Arabia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_26">26&#160;</span>He compassed also all the children of <a href='#FN65'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Madian, and burned up their tabernacles, and spoiled their sheepcotes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_27">27&#160;</span>Then he went down into the plain of <a href='#FN66'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Damascus in the time of wheat harvest, and burnt up all their fields, and destroyed their flocks and herds, also he spoiled their cities, and <a href='#FN67'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>utterly wasted their countries, and smote all their young men with <a href='#FN68'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the edge of the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT2_28">28&#160;</span>Therefore the fear and dread of him fell upon all the inhabitants of the sea coasts, which were in <a href='#FN69'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Sidon and Tyrus, and them that dwelt in Sur and Ocina, and all that dwelt in <a href='#FN70'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Jemnaan; and they that dwelt in <a href='#FN71'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Azotus and <a href='#FN72'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Ascalon feared him greatly.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_1">1&#160;</span>So they sent ambassadors unto him to treat of peace, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_2">2&#160;</span>Behold, we the servants of Nabuchodonosor <a href='#FN73'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the great king lie before thee; use us as shall be good in thy sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_3">3&#160;</span>Behold, our houses, and all our places, and all <a href='#FN74'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>our fields of wheat, and flocks, and herds, and all the lodges of our tents lie before thy face; use them as it pleaseth thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_4">4&#160;</span>Behold, even our cities and the inhabitants thereof are thy servants; come and deal with them as seemeth good unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_5">5&#160;</span>So the men came to Holofernes, and declared unto him after this manner. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_6">6&#160;</span>Then came he down toward <a href='#FN75'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the sea coast, both he and his army, and set garrisons in the high cities, and took out of them chosen men for aid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_7">7&#160;</span>So they and all the country round about received them <a href='#FN76'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>with garlands, <a href='#FN77'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>with dances, and with <a href='#FN78'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>timbrels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_8">8&#160;</span>Yet he did cast down their frontiers, and <a href='#FN79'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>cut down their groves: for he had decreed to destroy all the gods of the land, that all nations should worship Nabuchodonosor only, and that all tongues and tribes should call upon him as god. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_9">9&#160;</span>Also he came over against <a href='#FN80'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Esdraelon near unto <a href='#FN81'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Judea, over against the <a href='#FN82'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>great strait of Judea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT3_10">10&#160;</span>And he pitched between <a href='#FN83'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Geba and <a href='#FN84'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Scythopolis, and there he tarried a whole month, that he might gather together all the <a href='#FN85'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>carriages of his army.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_1">1&#160;</span>Now the children of Israel, that dwelt in Judea, heard all that Holofernes the chief captain of Nabuchodonosor king of the Assyrians had done to the nations, and after what manner he had spoiled all their temples, and brought them to nought. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore they were exceedingly afraid of him, and were troubled for Jerusalem, and for the temple of the Lord their God: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>For they were newly returned from the captivity, and all the people <a href='#FN87'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of Judea were lately gathered together: and the vessels, and <a href='#FN88'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the altar, and <a href='#FN89'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the house, were sanctified after the profanation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_4">4&#160;</span>Therefore they sent into all the coasts of <a href='#FN90'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Samaria, and the villages and to <a href='#FN91'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Bethoron, and Belmen, and Jericho, and to <a href='#FN92'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Choba, and Esora, and to the valley of <a href='#FN93'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Salem: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_5">5&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN94'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>possessed themselves beforehand of all the tops of the high mountains, and fortified the villages that were in them, and laid up victuals for the provision of war: for <a href='#FN95'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>their fields were of late reaped. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_6">6&#160;</span>Also <a href='#FN96'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Joacim the high priest, which was in those days in Jerusalem, wrote to them that dwelt in <a href='#FN97'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Bethulia, and <a href='#FN98'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Betomestham, which is over against <a href='#FN99'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Esdraelon toward the <a href='#FN100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>open country, near to <a href='#FN101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Dothaim, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_7">7&#160;</span>Charging them to keep <a href='#FN102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the passages of the hill country: for by them there was an entrance into Judea, and it was easy to stop them that would come up, because the passage was straight, <a href='#FN103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for two men at the most. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_8">8&#160;</span>And the children of Israel did as <a href='#FN104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Joacim the high priest had commanded them, with the <a href='#FN105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ancients of all the people of Israel, which dwelt at Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_9">9&#160;</span>Then every man of Israel cried to God with great <a href='#FN106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>fervency, and with great <a href='#FN107'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>vehemency did they humble their souls: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_10">10&#160;</span>Both they, and their wives and their children, and their cattle, and every stranger and hireling, and their servants bought with money, <a href='#FN108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>put sackcloth upon their loins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_11">11&#160;</span>Thus every man and women, and the little children, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, <a href='#FN109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>fell before the temple, and <a href='#FN110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>cast ashes upon their heads, and <a href='#FN111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>spread out their sackcloth before the face of the Lord: also they put sackcloth about the altar, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_12">12&#160;</span>And cried to the God of Israel all with one consent earnestly, that he would not give their children for a prey, and their wives <a href='#FN112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>for a spoil, and the cities of their inheritance to destruction, and the sanctuary to profanation and reproach, and for the nations to rejoice at. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_13">13&#160;</span>So God heard their prayers, and <a href='#FN113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>looked upon their afflictions: for the people fasted many days in all Judea and Jerusalem <a href='#FN114'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>before the sanctuary of the Lord <a href='#FN115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Almighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_14">14&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Joacim the high priest, and all the priests that stood before the Lord, and they which ministered unto the Lord, <a href='#FN117'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>had their loins girt with sackcloth, and <a href='#FN118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>offered the daily burnt offerings, with the vows and free gifts of the people, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT4_15">15&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN119'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>had ashes on their <a href='#FN120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>mitres, and cried unto the Lord with all their power, that he would look upon all the house of Israel graciously.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_1">1&#160;</span>Then was it declared to Holofernes, the chief captain of the army of Assur, that the children of Israel had prepared for war, and had shut up <a href='#FN121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the passages of the hill country, and had fortified <a href='#FN122'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all <a href='#FN123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the tops of the high hills and had laid <a href='#FN124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>impediments in the champaign countries: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_2">2&#160;</span>Wherewith he was very angry, and called all the princes of <a href='#FN125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Moab, and the captains of <a href='#FN126'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Ammon, and all the governors of <a href='#FN127'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the sea coast, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_3">3&#160;</span>And he said unto them, Tell me now, ye sons of Chanaan, who this people is, that dwelleth in the hill country, and what are the cities that they inhabit, and what is the multitude of their army, and wherein is their power and strength, and what king is set over them, or captain of their army; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_4">4&#160;</span>And why have they determined not to come and meet me, more than all the inhabitants of the west. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_5">5&#160;</span>Then said <a href='#FN128'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Achior, the captain of all the sons of <a href='#FN129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Ammon, Let my lord now hear a word from the mouth of thy servant, and I will declare unto thee the truth concerning this people, which dwelleth near thee, and inhabiteth the hill countries: and there shall no lie come out of the mouth of thy servant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_6">6&#160;</span>This people are descended of the Chaldeans: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_7">7&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>they sojourned heretofore in <a href='#FN131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Mesopotamia, because <a href='#FN132'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>they would not follow the gods of their fathers, which were in the land of Chaldea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_8">8&#160;</span>For they <a href='#FN133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>left the way of their ancestors, and worshipped <a href='#FN134'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the God of heaven, the God whom they knew: so they cast them out from the face of their gods, and they fled into <a href='#FN135'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Mesopotamia, and sojourned there many days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_9">9&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN136'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>their God commanded them to depart from the place where they sojourned, and to go into the land of Chanaan: where they dwelt, and <a href='#FN137'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>were increased with gold and silver, and with very much cattle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_10">10&#160;</span>But when a famine covered all the land of Chanaan, <a href='#FN138'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>they went down into Egypt, and sojourned there, while they were nourished, and <a href='#FN139'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>became there a great multitude, so that one could not number their nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN140'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the king of Egypt rose up against them, and <a href='#FN141'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>dealt subtilly with them, and brought them low with labouring in brick, and made them slaves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Then they cried unto their God, and <a href='#FN143'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>he smote all the land of Egypt with incurable plagues: so <a href='#FN144'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the Egyptians cast them out of their sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_13">13&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN145'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>God dried the Red sea before them, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_14">14&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>brought them <a href='#FN147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to mount Sina, and <a href='#FN148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Cades-Barne, and cast forth all that dwelt in the wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>So they dwelt in the land of the Amorites, and they destroyed by their strength all them of <a href='#FN150'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Esebon, and <a href='#FN151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>passing over Jordan they possessed <a href='#FN152'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>all the hill country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_16">16&#160;</span>And they cast forth before them the <a href='#FN153'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Chanaanite, the <a href='#FN154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Pherezite, the <a href='#FN155'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Jebusite, and the <a href='#FN156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a><a href='#FN157'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Sychemite, and all the <a href='#FN158'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Gergesites, and they dwelt in that country many days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_17">17&#160;</span>And whilst they sinned not before their God, they prospered, because the <a href='#FN159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>God that hateth iniquity was with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_18">18&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN160'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>when they departed from the way which he appointed them, they were destroyed in many battles very sore, and <a href='#FN161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>were led captives into a land that was not their’s, and the temple of their God was cast to the ground, and their cities were taken by the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_19">19&#160;</span>But now are they returned to their God, and <a href='#FN162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>are come up from the places where they were scattered, and have possessed Jerusalem, where their sanctuary is, and <a href='#FN163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>are seated in the hill country; for it was desolate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_20">20&#160;</span>Now therefore, my lord and governor, if there be any error against this people, and they sin against their God, let us consider that this shall be their <a href='#FN164'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>ruin, and let us go up, and we shall overcome them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_21">21&#160;</span>But if there be no iniquity in their nation, let my lord now pass by, lest their Lord defend them, and their God be for them, and we become a reproach before all the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_22">22&#160;</span>And when Achior had finished these sayings, all the people standing round about the tent murmured, and the <a href='#FN165'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>chief men of Holofernes, and all that dwelt by <a href='#FN166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ii</a>the sea side, and in <a href='#FN167'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ii</a>Moab, spake that he should kill him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_23">23&#160;</span>For, <a href='#FN168'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>say they, we will not be afraid of the face of the children of Israel: for, lo, it is a people that have no strength nor power <a href='#FN169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for a strong <a href='#FN170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>battle </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT5_24">24&#160;</span>Now therefore, lord Holofernes, we will go up, and they shall be <a href='#FN171'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>a prey to be devoured of all thine army.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_1">1&#160;</span>And when the tumult of men that were about the council was ceased, Holofernes the chief captain of the army of Assur said unto Achior and all the <a href='#FN172'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Moabites before all the company of other nations, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_2">2&#160;</span>And who art thou, Achior, and <a href='#FN173'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the hirelings of Ephraim, that thou hast prophesied against us as to day, and hast said, that we should not make war with the people of Israel, <a href='#FN174'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>because their God will defend them? and who is God but Nabuchodonosor? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_3">3&#160;</span>He will send his power, and will destroy them from the face of the earth, and <a href='#FN175'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>their God shall not deliver them: but we his servants will destroy them as one man; for they are not able to sustain the power of our horses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_4">4&#160;</span>For with them we will tread them under foot, and their mountains <a href='#FN176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>shall be drunken with their blood, and their fields shall be filled with their dead bodies, and their footsteps shall not be able to stand before us, for they shall utterly perish, saith king Nabuchodonosor, lord of all the earth: for he said, None of my words shall be in vain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_5">5&#160;</span>And thou, Achior, <a href='#FN177'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>an hireling of <a href='#FN178'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Ammon, which hast spoken these words in the day of thine iniquity, shalt see my face no more from this day, until I take vengeance of this nation <a href='#FN179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>that came out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_6">6&#160;</span>And then shall the sword of mine army, and the multitude of them that serve me, pass through thy sides, and thou shalt fall among their slain, <a href='#FN180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>when I return. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_7">7&#160;</span>Now therefore my servants shall bring thee back into the hill country, and shall set thee in one of the cities of <a href='#FN181'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the passages: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_8">8&#160;</span>And thou shalt not perish, till thou be destroyed with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_9">9&#160;</span>And if thou persuade thyself in thy mind that they shall not be taken, let not <a href='#FN182'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>thy countenance fall: I have spoken it, and none of my words shall be in vain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_10">10&#160;</span>Then Holofernes commanded his servants, that waited in his tent, to take Achior, and bring him to <a href='#FN183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Bethulia, and deliver him into the hands of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_11">11&#160;</span>So his servants took him, and brought him out of the camp into the plain, and they went from the midst of the plain into the hill country, and came unto <a href='#FN184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the fountains that were under Bethulia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_12">12&#160;</span>And when the men of the city saw them, they took up their weapons, and went out of the city to the top of the hill: and every man that used a sling kept them from coming up by casting of stones against them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_13">13&#160;</span>Nevertheless having gotten privily under the hill, they bound Achior, and cast him down, and left him at the foot of the hill, and returned to their lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_14">14&#160;</span>But the Israelites descended from their city, and came unto him, and loosed him, and brought him to Bethulia, and presented him to the governors of the city: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_15">15&#160;</span>Which were in those days Ozias the son of Micha, of the tribe of Simeon, and Chabris the son of Gothoniel, and Charmis the son of Melchiel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_16">16&#160;</span>And they called together all <a href='#FN185'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the ancients of the city, and all their youth ran together, and their women, to the assembly, and they set Achior in the midst of all their people. Then Ozias asked him of that which was done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_17">17&#160;</span>And he answered and declared unto them the words of <a href='#FN186'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the council of Holofernes, and all the words that he had spoken in the midst of the princes of Assur, and whatsoever Holofernes had spoken proudly against the house of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_18">18&#160;</span>Then the people fell down and worshipped God, and cried unto God. saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_19">19&#160;</span>O Lord <a href='#FN187'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>God of heaven, behold their pride, and pity the low estate of our nation, and <a href='#FN188'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>look upon the face of those that are sanctified unto thee this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_20">20&#160;</span>Then they comforted Achior, and praised him greatly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT6_21">21&#160;</span>And Ozias took him out of the assembly unto his house, and <a href='#FN189'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>made a feast to <a href='#FN190'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the elders; and they called on the God of Israel all that night for help.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_1">1&#160;</span>The next day Holofernes commanded all his army, and all his people which were come to take his part, that they should remove their camp against Bethulia, to take aforehand <a href='#FN191'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the ascents of the hill country, and to make war against the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_2">2&#160;</span>Then their strong men removed their camps in that day, and the army of the men of war was <a href='#FN192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>an hundred and seventy thousand footmen, and twelve thousand horsemen, beside the baggage, and other men that were afoot among them, a very great multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_3">3&#160;</span>And they camped in the valley near unto Bethulia, <a href='#FN193'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>by the fountain, and they spread themselves in breadth <a href='#FN194'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>over <a href='#FN195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Dothaim even to <a href='#FN196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Belmaim, and in length from Bethulia unto <a href='#FN197'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Cynamon, which is over against <a href='#FN198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Esdraelon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_4">4&#160;</span>Now the children of Israel, when they saw the multitude of them, were greatly troubled, and said every one to his neighbour, Now will these men <a href='#FN199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>lick up the face of the earth; for neither the high mountains, nor the valleys, nor the hills, are able to bear their weight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_5">5&#160;</span>Then every man took up his weapons of war, and when they had kindled fires upon their towers, they remained and watched all that night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_6">6&#160;</span>But in the second day Holofernes brought forth all his horsemen in the sight of the children of Israel which were in Bethulia, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_7">7&#160;</span>And viewed <a href='#FN200'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the passages up to the city, and came to <a href='#FN201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the fountains of their waters, and took them, and set <a href='#FN202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>garrisons of men of war over them, and he himself removed toward his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_8">8&#160;</span>Then came unto him all the chief of <a href='#FN203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the children of Esau, and all the governors of the people of <a href='#FN204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Moab, and the captains of <a href='#FN205'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the sea coast, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_9">9&#160;</span>Let our lord now hear a word, that there be not an overthrow in thine army. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_10">10&#160;</span>For this people of the children of Israel do not trust in their spears, but in the height of the mountains wherein they dwell, because it is not easy to come up to the tops of their mountains. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_11">11&#160;</span>Now therefore, my lord, fight not against them in battle <a href='#FN206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>array, and there shall not so much as one man of thy people perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_12">12&#160;</span>Remain in thy camp, and keep all the men of thine army, and let thy servants get into their hands <a href='#FN207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the fountain of water, which issueth forth of the foot of the mountain: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_13">13&#160;</span>For all the inhabitants of Bethulia have their water thence; so shall thirst kill them, and they shall give up their city, and we and our people shall go up to the tops of the mountains that are near, and will camp upon them, to watch that none go out of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_14">14&#160;</span>So they and their wives and their children shall be consumed with fire, and before the sword come against them, they shall be overthrown in the streets where they dwell. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_15">15&#160;</span>Thus shalt thou render them an evil reward; because they rebelled, and met not thy person peaceably. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_16">16&#160;</span>And these words pleased Holofernes and all his servants, and he appointed to do as they had spoken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_17">17&#160;</span>So the <a href='#FN208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>camp of the children of <a href='#FN209'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Ammon departed, and with them five thousand of the Assyrians, and they pitched in the valley, and took the waters, and <a href='#FN210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the fountains of the waters of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_18">18&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the children of Esau went up with the children of <a href='#FN212'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Ammon, and camped in the hill country over against <a href='#FN213'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Dothaim: and they sent some of them toward the south, and toward the east over against Ekrebel, which is near unto Chusi, that is upon the brook Mochmur; and the rest of the army of the Assyrians camped in the plain, and <a href='#FN214'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>covered the face of the whole land; and their tents and <a href='#FN215'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>carriages were pitched to a very great multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_19">19&#160;</span>Then the children of Israel cried unto the Lord their God, because their heart failed, for all their enemies had compassed them round about, and there was no way to escape out from among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_20">20&#160;</span>Thus all the <a href='#FN216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>company of Assur remained about them, both their footmen, chariots, and horsemen, four and thirty days, so that all their vessels of water failed all the inhibitants of Bethulia. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_21">21&#160;</span>And the <a href='#FN217'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN218'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>cisterns were emptied, and they had not water to drink their fill for one day; for they gave them drink <a href='#FN219'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>by measure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_22">22&#160;</span>Therefore their young children were out of heart, and their women and young men <a href='#FN220'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>fainted for thirst, and fell down in the streets of the city, and by the passages of the gates, and there was no longer any strength in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_23">23&#160;</span>Then all the people assembled to <a href='#FN221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Ozias, and to the chief of the city, both young men, and women, and children, and cried with a loud voice, and said before all <a href='#FN222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the elders, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>God be judge between us and you: for ye have done us great injury, in that ye have not required peace of the children of Assur. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_25">25&#160;</span>For now we have no helper: but <a href='#FN224'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>God hath sold us into their hands, that we should be thrown down before them with thirst and great destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_26">26&#160;</span>Now therefore call them unto you, and deliver the whole city <a href='#FN225'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>for a spoil to the people of Holofernes, and to all his army. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_27">27&#160;</span>For it is better for us to be made a spoil unto them, than to die for thirst: for we will be his servants, that our souls may live, and not see the death of our infants before our eyes, nor our wives nor our children to die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>We take to witness against you the heaven and the earth, and our God and Lord of our fathers, which punisheth us according to our sins and <a href='#FN227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the sins of our fathers, <a href='#FN228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that he do not <a href='#FN229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>according as we have said this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_29">29&#160;</span>Then there was great weeping with one consent in the midst of the assembly; and they cried unto the Lord God with a loud voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_30">30&#160;</span>Then said Ozias to them, Brethren, be of good courage, <a href='#FN230'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>let us yet endure five days, in the which space the Lord our God may turn his mercy toward us; for he will not forsake us <a href='#FN231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>utterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_31">31&#160;</span>And if these days pass, and there come no help unto us, I will do <a href='#FN232'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>according to your word. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT7_32">32&#160;</span>And he dispersed the people, every one to their own charge; and they went unto the walls and towers of their city, and sent the women and children into their houses: and they were very low brought in the city.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_1">1&#160;</span>Now at that time Judith heard thereof, which was the daughter of Merari, the son of Ox, the son of Joseph, the son of Ozel, the son of Elcia, the son of Ananias, the son of Gedeon, the son of Raphaim, the son of Acitho, the son of Eliu, the son of Eliab, the son of Nathanael, the son of <a href='#FN233'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Samael, the son of Salasadal, <a href='#FN234'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the son of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_2">2&#160;</span>And Manasses was her husband, of her tribe and kindred, who died in <a href='#FN235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the barley harvest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_3">3&#160;</span>For as he stood overseeing them that bound sheaves in the field, <a href='#FN236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the heat came upon his head, and he fell on his bed, and died in the city of Bethulia: and they buried him with his fathers in the field between <a href='#FN237'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Dothaim and <a href='#FN238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Balamo. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_4">4&#160;</span>So Judith was a widow in her house three years and <a href='#FN239'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>four months. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_5">5&#160;</span>And she made her a tent upon <a href='#FN240'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the top of her house, and <a href='#FN241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>put on sackcloth upon her loins and ware <a href='#FN242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>her widow’s apparel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_6">6&#160;</span>And she fasted all the days of her widowhood, save <a href='#FN243'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the eves of the sabbaths, and <a href='#FN244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the sabbaths, and the eves of the new moons, and <a href='#FN245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the new moons and the feasts and solemn days of the house of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_7">7&#160;</span>She was also of a goodly countenance, and very beautiful to behold: and her husband Manasses had left her gold, and silver, and menservants and maidservants, and cattle, and lands; <a href='#FN246'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and she remained upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_8">8&#160;</span>And there was none that gave her an ill word; as she feared God greatly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_9">9&#160;</span>Now when she heard the evil words of the people against the governor, <a href='#FN247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>that they fainted for lack of water; for Judith had heard <a href='#FN248'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>all the words that Ozias had spoken unto them, and <a href='#FN249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>that he had sworn to deliver the city unto the Assyrians after five days; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_10">10&#160;</span>Then she sent her waitingwoman, that had the government of all things that she had, to call <a href='#FN250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Ozias and Chabris and Charmis, <a href='#FN251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the ancients of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_11">11&#160;</span>And they came unto her, and she said unto them, Hear me now, O ye governors of the inhabitants of Bethulia: for your words that ye have spoken before the people this day are not right, touching this oath which ye made and pronounced between God and you, and have promised to deliver the city to our enemies, unless within these days the Lord turn to help you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_12">12&#160;</span>And now who are ye <a href='#FN252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>that have tempted God this day, and stand instead of God among the children of men? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_13">13&#160;</span>And now try the Lord <a href='#FN253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Almighty, but ye shall never know any thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_14">14&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>ye cannot find the depth of the heart of man, neither can ye perceive the things that he thinketh: then how can ye search out God, that hath made all these things, and <a href='#FN255'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>know his mind, or comprehend his purpose? Nay, my brethren, <a href='#FN256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>provoke not the Lord our God to anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_15">15&#160;</span>For if he will not help us within these five days, he hath power to defend us when he will, even every day, or to destroy us before our enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_16">16&#160;</span>Do not <a href='#FN257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bind the counsels of the Lord our God: for <a href='#FN258'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>God is not as man, that he may be threatened; <a href='#FN259'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>neither is he as the son of man, that he should be wavering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore let us wait for salvation of him, and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice, if it please him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_18">18&#160;</span>For there arose none in our age, neither is there any now in these days neither tribe, nor family, nor <a href='#FN260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>people, nor city among us, which worship gods made with hands, <a href='#FN261'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>as hath been aforetime. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_19">19&#160;</span>For the which cause our fathers were given to the sword, and for a spoil, and had a great fall before our enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_20">20&#160;</span>But we know none other god, therefore we trust that he will not despise us, nor any of our nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_21">21&#160;</span>For if we be taken so, all Judea shall lie waste, and our sanctuary shall be spoiled; and he will require the profanation thereof at our mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_22">22&#160;</span>And the <a href='#FN262'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>slaughter of our brethren, and the captivity of the country, and the desolation of our inheritance, will he turn upon our heads among the Gentiles, wheresoever we shall be in bondage; and we shall be <a href='#FN263'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>an offence and a reproach to all them that possess us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_23">23&#160;</span>For our servitude shall not be directed to favour: but the Lord our God shall turn it to dishonour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_24">24&#160;</span>Now therefore, O brethren, let us shew an example to our brethren, because their hearts depend upon us, and the sanctuary, and the house, and the altar, rest upon us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_25">25&#160;</span>Moreover let us give thanks to the Lord our God, which trieth us, even as he did our fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_26">26&#160;</span>Remember what things he did to <a href='#FN264'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Abraham, and how he tried <a href='#FN265'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Isaac, and <a href='#FN266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>what happened to Jacob in Mesopotamia of Syria, when he kept the sheep of Laban his mother’s brother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_27">27&#160;</span>For he hath not tried us in the fire, as he did them, for the examination of their hearts, neither hath he taken vengeance on us: but <a href='#FN267'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the Lord doth scourge them that come near unto him, to admonish them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_28">28&#160;</span>Then said Ozias to her, All that thou hast spoken hast thou spoken with a good heart, and there is none that may gainsay thy words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_29">29&#160;</span>For this is not the first day wherein thy wisdom is manifested; but from the beginning of thy days all the people have known thy understanding, because the disposition of thine heart is good. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_30">30&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN268'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the people were very thirsty, and compelled us to do unto them as we have spoken, and to bring an oath upon ourselves, which we will not break. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore now pray thou for us, because thou art a godly woman, and the Lord will send us rain to fill our <a href='#FN269'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>cisterns, and we shall faint no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_32">32&#160;</span>Then said Judith unto them, Hear me, and I will do a thing, which shall go throughout all generations to the children of our nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_33">33&#160;</span>Ye shall stand this night in the gate, and I will go forth with my <a href='#FN270'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>waitingwoman: and within the days that ye have promised to deliver the city to our enemies <a href='#FN271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the Lord will visit Israel by mine hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_34">34&#160;</span>But enquire not ye of mine act: for I will not declare it unto you, till the things be finished that I do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_35">35&#160;</span>Then said Ozias and the princes unto her, <a href='#FN272'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Go in peace, and the Lord God be before thee, to take vengeance on our enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT8_36">36&#160;</span>So they returned from <a href='#FN273'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the tent, and went to their wards.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_1">1&#160;</span>Judith <a href='#FN274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>fell upon her face, and <a href='#FN275'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>put ashes upon her head, and uncovered <a href='#FN276'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the sackcloth wherewith she was clothed; and about <a href='#FN277'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the time that the incense of that evening was offered in Jerusalem in the house of the Lord Judith cried with a loud voice, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_2">2&#160;</span>O Lord God of my father Simeon, <a href='#FN278'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>to whom thou gavest a sword to take vengeance of the strangers, who loosened the girdle of a maid to defile her, and discovered the thigh to her shame, and polluted her virginity to her reproach; for thou saidst, <a href='#FN279'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>It shall not be so; and yet they did so: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_3">3&#160;</span>Wherefore thou gavest their rulers to be slain, so that they dyed their bed in blood, being deceived, and smotest the servants with their lords, and the lords upon their thrones; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_4">4&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN280'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>hast given their wives <a href='#FN281'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>for a prey, and <a href='#FN282'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>their daughters to be captives, and all <a href='#FN283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>their spoils to be divided among thy dear children; which <a href='#FN284'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>were moved with thy zeal, and abhorred the pollution of their blood, and called upon thee for aid: O God, O my God, hear me also a widow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_5">5&#160;</span>For thou hast wrought not only those things, but also the things which fell out before, and which ensued after; thou hast thought upon the things which are now, and which are to come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_6">6&#160;</span>Yea, what things thou didst determine were ready at hand, and said, Lo, we are here: for all thy ways are prepared, and thy judgments are in thy foreknowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_7">7&#160;</span>For, behold, the Assyrians are multiplied in their power; they are exalted with horse and man; they glory in the strength of their footmen; <a href='#FN285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they trust in shield, and spear, and bow, and sling; and know not that thou art <a href='#FN286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the Lord that breakest the battles: <a href='#FN287'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the Lord is thy name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>jj</a>Throw down their strength in thy power, and bring down their force in thy wrath: for they have purposed to defile thy sanctuary, and to pollute the tabernacle where thy glorious name resteth and to cast down with sword <a href='#FN289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the horn of thy altar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_9">9&#160;</span>Behold their pride, and send thy wrath upon their heads: give into mine hand, which am a widow, the power that I have conceived. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Smite by the deceit of my lips the servant with the prince, and the prince with the servant: break down their <a href='#FN291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>stateliness <a href='#FN292'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>by the hand of a woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_11">11&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>thy power standeth not in multitude nor thy might in strong men: for thou art a God of the afflicted, an helper of the oppressed, an upholder of the weak, a protector of the forlorn, a <a href='#FN294'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>saviour of <a href='#FN295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>them that are without hope. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_12">12&#160;</span>I pray thee, I pray thee, O God of my father, and God of the inheritance of Israel, <a href='#FN296'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Lord of the heavens and earth, Creator of the waters, king of every creature, hear thou my prayer: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_13">13&#160;</span>And make my speech and deceit to be their wound and stripe, who have purposed cruel things against thy covenant, and thy hallowed house, and against the top of Sion, and against the house of the possession of thy children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT9_14">14&#160;</span>And make every nation and tribe to acknowledge that thou art the God of all power and might, and that there is none other that protecteth the people of Israel but thou.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_1">1&#160;</span>Now after that she had ceased to cry unto the God of Israel, and had made an end of all these words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_2">2&#160;</span>She rose <a href='#FN297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>where she had fallen down, and called her maid, and went down into the house <a href='#FN298'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in the which she abode in the sabbath days, and in her feast days, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_3">3&#160;</span>And pulled off <a href='#FN299'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the sackcloth which she had on, and put off <a href='#FN300'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the garments of her widowhood, and <a href='#FN301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>washed her body all over with water, and <a href='#FN302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>anointed herself with precious ointment, and braided the hair of her head, and put on a <a href='#FN303'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>tire upon it, and put on her garments of gladness, wherewith she was clad during the life of <a href='#FN305'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Manasses her husband. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_4">4&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN306'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>she took sandals upon her feet, and put about her her <a href='#FN307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>bracelets, and <a href='#FN308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>her chains, and her <a href='#FN309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>rings, and her <a href='#FN310'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a><a href='#FN311'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>earrings, and all her ornaments, and decked herself bravely, to allure the eyes of all men that should see her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_5">5&#160;</span>Then she gave her maid a bottle of wine, and <a href='#FN312'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>a cruse of oil, and filled a bag with parched corn, and <a href='#FN313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>lumps of figs, and with fine bread; so she <a href='#FN314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>folded all these things together, and laid them upon her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_6">6&#160;</span>Thus they went forth to the gate of the city of Bethulia, and <a href='#FN315'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>found standing there Ozias and <a href='#FN316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the ancients of the city, Chabris and Charmis. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_7">7&#160;</span>And when they saw her, that her countenance was altered, and her apparel was changed, they wondered at her beauty very greatly, and said unto her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_8">8&#160;</span>The God, the God of our fathers give thee favour, and accomplish thine <a href='#FN317'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>enterprizes to the glory of the children of Israel, and to the exaltation of Jerusalem. Then they worshipped God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_9">9&#160;</span>And she said unto them, Command the gates of the city to be opened unto me, that I may go forth to accomplish the things whereof ye have spoken with me. So they commanded the young men to open unto her, as she had spoken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_10">10&#160;</span>And when they had done so, Judith went out, she, and her maid with her; and the men of the city looked after her, until she was gone down the mountain, and till she had passed the valley, and could see her no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_11">11&#160;</span>Thus they went straight forth in the valley: and the <a href='#FN318'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>mm</a>first watch of the Assyrians met her, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_12">12&#160;</span>And took her, and asked her, Of what people art thou? and whence comest thou? and whither goest thou? And she said, I am a woman of the Hebrews, and am fled from them: for they shall be given you <a href='#FN319'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>to be consumed: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_13">13&#160;</span>And I am coming before Holofernes the chief captain of your army, to declare words of truth; and I will shew him a way, whereby he shall go, and win all the hill country, without losing the body or life of any one of his men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_14">14&#160;</span>Now when the men heard her words, and beheld her countenance, they wondered greatly at her beauty, and said unto her, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_15">15&#160;</span>Thou hast saved thy life, in that thou hast hasted to come down to the presence of our lord: now therefore come to his tent, and some of us shall <a href='#FN320'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>conduct thee, until they have delivered thee to his hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_16">16&#160;</span>And when thou standest before him, be not afraid in thine heart, but shew unto him according to thy word; and he will entreat thee well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_17">17&#160;</span>Then they chose out of them an hundred men <a href='#FN321'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to accompany her and her maid; and they brought her to the tent of Holofernes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_18">18&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN322'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>was there a concourse throughout all the camp: for her coming was noised among the tents, and they came about her, as she stood without the tent of Holofernes, till they told him of her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_19">19&#160;</span>And they wondered at her beauty, and admired the children of Israel because of her, and every one said to his neighbour, Who would despise this people, that have among them such women? surely it is not good that one man of them be left who being let go might deceive the whole earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_20">20&#160;</span>And they that <a href='#FN323'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>lay near Holofernes went out, and all his servants and they brought her into the tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_21">21&#160;</span>Now Holofernes rested upon his bed under a <a href='#FN324'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>canopy, which was woven with purple, and gold, and emeralds, and precious stones. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_22">22&#160;</span>So they shewed him of her; and he came out before his tent with <a href='#FN325'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>silver lamps going before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT10_23">23&#160;</span>And when Judith was come before him and his servants they all marvelled at the beauty of her countenance; and <a href='#FN326'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>she fell down upon her face, and did reverence unto him: and his servants took her up.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_1">1&#160;</span>Then said Holofernes unto her, Woman, be of good comfort, fear not in thine heart: for I never hurt any that was willing to serve Nabuchodonosor, the king of all the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_2">2&#160;</span>Now therefore, if thy people that dwelleth in the mountains had not <a href='#FN327'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>set light by me, I would not have lifted up my spear against them: but they have done these things to themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_3">3&#160;</span>But now tell me wherefore thou art fled from them, and art come unto us: for thou art come for safeguard; be of good comfort, thou shalt live <a href='#FN328'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>this night, and hereafter: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_4">4&#160;</span>For none shall hurt thee, but entreat thee well, as they do the servants of king Nabuchodonosor my lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_5">5&#160;</span>Then Judith said unto him, Receive the words of thy servant, and suffer thine handmaid to speak in thy presence, and I will declare no lie to my lord <a href='#FN329'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>this night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_6">6&#160;</span>And if thou wilt follow the words of thine handmaid, God will bring the thing perfectly to pass by thee; and my lord shall not fail of his <a href='#FN330'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>purposes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>As Nabuchodonosor king of all the earth liveth, and as his power liveth, who hath sent thee for the upholding of every living thing: for not only men shall serve him by thee, but also <a href='#FN332'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>the beasts of the field, and the cattle, and the fowls of the air, shall live by thy power under Nabuchodonosor and all his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_8">8&#160;</span>For we have heard of thy wisdom and thy policies, and it is reported in all the earth, that thou only art <a href='#FN333'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>excellent in all the kingdom, and mighty in knowledge, and wonderful in feats of war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_9">9&#160;</span>Now as concerning the matter, which <a href='#FN334'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Achior did speak in thy council, we have heard his words; for the men of Bethulia <a href='#FN335'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN336'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>saved him, and he declared unto them all that he had spoken unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore, O lord and governor, reject not <a href='#FN337'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>his word; but lay it up in thine heart, for it is true: for our nation shall not be punished, neither can sword prevail against them, except they sin against their God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_11">11&#160;</span>And now, that my lord be not defeated and frustrate of his purpose, even death is now fallen upon them, and their sin hath overtaken them, wherewith they will <a href='#FN338'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>provoke their God to anger whensoever they shall do that which is not fit to be done: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_12">12&#160;</span>For their victuals fail them, and all their water is scant, and they have determined to lay hands upon their cattle, and purposed to consume all those things, that God hath forbidden them to eat by his laws: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_13">13&#160;</span>And are resolved to spend <a href='#FN339'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the firstfruits of the tenths of wine and oil, which they had sanctified, and <a href='#FN340'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>reserved for the priests that serve in Jerusalem before the face of our God; the which things it is not lawful for any of the people so much as to touch with their hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_14">14&#160;</span>For they have sent some to Jerusalem, because they also that dwell there have done the like, to bring them a licence from the <a href='#FN341'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>senate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_15">15&#160;</span>Now when they shall bring them word, they will forthwith do it, and they shall be given to thee to be destroyed the same day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_16">16&#160;</span>Wherefore I thine handmaid, knowing all this, am fled from their presence; and God hath sent me to work things with thee, whereat all the earth shall be astonished, and whosoever shall hear it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_17">17&#160;</span>For thy servant is <a href='#FN342'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>religious, and serveth <a href='#FN343'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the God of heaven <a href='#FN344'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>day and night: now therefore, my lord, I will remain with thee, and thy servant will go out by night into the valley, and I will pray unto God, and he will tell me when they have committed their sins: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_18">18&#160;</span>And I will come and shew it unto thee: then thou shalt go forth with all thine army, and there shall be none of them that shall resist thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_19">19&#160;</span>And I will lead thee through the midst of Judea, until thou come before Jerusalem; and I will set thy throne in the midst thereof; and thou shalt drive them <a href='#FN345'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>as sheep that have no shepherd, and <a href='#FN346'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a dog shall not so much as <a href='#FN347'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>open his mouth at thee: for <a href='#FN348'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these things <a href='#FN349'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>were told me according to my foreknowledge, and they were declared unto me, and I am sent to tell thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_20">20&#160;</span>Then her words pleased Holofernes and all his servants; and they marvelled at her wisdom, and said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_21">21&#160;</span>There is not such a woman from one end of the earth to the other, both for beauty of face, and wisdom of words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_22">22&#160;</span>Likewise Holofernes said unto her. God hath done well to send thee before the people, that strength might be in our hands and destruction upon them that <a href='#FN350'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>lightly regard my lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT11_23">23&#160;</span>And now thou art both beautiful in thy countenance, and witty in thy words: surely if thou do as thou hast spoken <a href='#FN351'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>thy God shall be my God, and thou shalt dwell in the house of king Nabuchodonosor, and shalt be renowned through the whole earth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_1">1&#160;</span>Then he commanded to bring her in where <a href='#FN352'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>his plate was set; and bade that they should prepare for her of his own meats, and that she should drink of his own wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_2">2&#160;</span>And Judith said, <a href='#FN353'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>I will not eat thereof, lest there be an offence: but provision shall be made for me <a href='#FN354'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>of the things that I have brought. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_3">3&#160;</span>Then Holofernes said unto her, If thy provision should fail, how should we give thee the like? for there be none with us of thy nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_4">4&#160;</span>Then said Judith unto him <a href='#FN355'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>As thy soul liveth, my lord, thine handmaid shall not spend those things that I have, before the Lord work by mine hand the things that he hath determined. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_5">5&#160;</span>Then the servants of Holofernes brought her <a href='#FN356'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>into the tent, and she slept <a href='#FN357'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>till midnight, and she arose when it was toward <a href='#FN358'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the morning watch, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_6">6&#160;</span>And sent to Holofernes, saving, Let my lord now command that thine handmaid may go forth unto prayer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_7">7&#160;</span>Then Holofernes commanded his guard that they should not stay her: thus she abode in the camp three days, and went out in the night into the valley of Bethulia, and washed herself <a href='#FN359'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>in a fountain of water by the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_8">8&#160;</span>And when she came out, she besought the Lord God of Israel to direct her way to <a href='#FN360'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the raising up of the children of her people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_9">9&#160;</span>So she came in clean, and remained in <a href='#FN361'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the tent, until she did eat her meat at evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_10">10&#160;</span>And in the fourth day Holofernes <a href='#FN362'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>made a feast to his own servants only, and called none of the officers to the banquet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_11">11&#160;</span>Then said he to Bagoas the eunuch, who had charge over all that he had, Go now, and persuade this Hebrew woman <a href='#FN363'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>which is with thee, that she come unto us, and eat and drink with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_12">12&#160;</span>For, lo, it will be a shame for our person, if we shall let such a woman go, not having had her company; for if we draw her not unto us, she will laugh us to scorn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_13">13&#160;</span>Then went Bagoas from the presence of Holofernes, and came to her, and he said, Let not this fair damsel fear to come to my lord, and to be honoured in his presence, and drink wine, and be merry with us and be made this day as one of the daughters of the Assyrians, which <a href='#FN364'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>serve in the house of Nabuchodonosor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_14">14&#160;</span>Then said Judith unto him, Who am I now, that I should gainsay my lord? surely whatsoever pleaseth him I will do speedily, and it shall be my joy unto the day of my death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_15">15&#160;</span>So she arose, and decked herself with her apparel and all her woman’s attire, and her maid went and laid soft skins on the ground for her over against Holofernes, which she had received of Bagoas for her daily use, that she might sit and eat upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_16">16&#160;</span>Now when Judith came in and sat down, Holofernes <a href='#FN365'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>his heart was ravished with her, and his mind was moved, and he desired greatly her company; for he waited a time to deceive her, from the day that he had seen her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_17">17&#160;</span>Then said Holofernes unto her, Drink now, and be merry with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_18">18&#160;</span>So Judith said, I will drink now, my lord, because my life is magnified in me this day more than all the days since I was born. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_19">19&#160;</span>Then she took and ate and drank before him <a href='#FN366'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>what her maid had prepared. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT12_20">20&#160;</span>And Holofernes took great delight in her, and drank more wine than he had drunk at any time in one day since he was born.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_1">1&#160;</span>Now when the evening was come, <a href='#FN367'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>his servants made haste to <a href='#FN368'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>depart, and Bagoas shut his tent without, and dismissed <a href='#FN369'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the waiters from the presence of his lord; and they went to their beds: for they were all weary, because the feast had been long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_2">2&#160;</span>And Judith was left alone in the tent, and Holofernes lying alone upon his bed: for <a href='#FN370'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he was filled with wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_3">3&#160;</span>Now Judith had commanded her maid to stand without her bedchamber, and to wait for her. coming forth, as she did daily: for she said she would go forth to her prayers, and she spake to Bagoas according to the same purpose. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_4">4&#160;</span>So all went forth and none was left in the bedchamber, <a href='#FN371'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>neither little nor great. Then Judith, standing by his bed, said in her heart, O Lord God of all power, look at this present upon the works of mine hands for the exaltation of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_5">5&#160;</span>For now is the time <a href='#FN372'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>to help thine inheritance, and to execute thine <a href='#FN373'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>enterprizes to the destruction of the enemies which are risen against us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_6">6&#160;</span>Then she came to the <a href='#FN374'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>pillar of the bed, which was at Holofernes’ head, and took down his <a href='#FN375'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>fauchion from thence, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_7">7&#160;</span>And approached to his bed, and took hold of the hair of his head, and said, Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_8">8&#160;</span>And she smote twice upon his neck with all her might, and <a href='#FN376'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>she took away his head from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_9">9&#160;</span>And tumbled his body down from the bed, and pulled down the <a href='#FN377'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>canopy from the <a href='#FN378'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>pillars; and <a href='#FN379'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>anon after she went forth, and gave Holofernes his head to her maid; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_10">10&#160;</span>And she put it in her <a href='#FN380'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>bag of meat: so they twain went together according to their custom unto prayer: and when they passed the camp, they compassed <a href='#FN381'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the valley, and went up the mountain of Bethulia, and came to the gates thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_11">11&#160;</span>Then said Judith afar off, to the watchmen at the gate, Open, open now the gate: God, even our God, is with us, to shew his power yet in Jerusalem, and his forces against the enemy, as he hath even done this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_12">12&#160;</span>Now when the men of her city heard her voice, they made haste to go down to the gate of their city, and they called <a href='#FN382'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the elders of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_13">13&#160;</span>And then they ran all together, <a href='#FN383'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>both small and great, for it was strange unto them that she was come: so they opened the gate, and received them, and made a fire for a light, and stood round about them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_14">14&#160;</span>Then she said to them with a loud voice, Praise, praise God, praise God, I say, for he hath not taken away his mercy from the house of Israel, but hath destroyed our enemies by mine hands this night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_15">15&#160;</span>So she took the head out of <a href='#FN384'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the bag, and shewed it, and said unto them, behold the head of Holofernes, the chief captain of the army of Assur, and behold the <a href='#FN385'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>canopy, wherein he did lie in his drunkenness; and <a href='#FN386'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the Lord hath smitten him by the hand of a woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>As the Lord liveth, who hath kept me in my way that I went, my countenance hath deceived him to his destruction, and yet hath he not committed sin with me, to defile and shame me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_17">17&#160;</span>Then all the people were wonderfully astonished, and bowed themselves and worshipped God, and said with one accord, Blessed be thou, O our God, which hast this day brought to nought the enemies of thy people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_18">18&#160;</span>Then said Ozias unto her, O daughter, blessed art thou of <a href='#FN388'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the most high God above all the women upon the earth; and blessed be the Lord God, <a href='#FN389'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>which hath created the heavens and the earth, which hath directed thee to the cutting off of the head of the chief of our enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_19">19&#160;</span>For this thy confidence shall not depart from the heart of men, which remember the power of God for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT13_20">20&#160;</span>And God turn these things to thee for a perpetual praise, to visit thee in good things because thou hast not spared thy life for the affliction of our nation, but hast revenged our ruin, walking a straight way before our God. <a href='#FN390'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>And all the people said; So be it, so be it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_1">1&#160;</span>Then said Judith unto them, Hear me now, my brethren, and take this head, and <a href='#FN391'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>hang it upon the highest place of your walls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_2">2&#160;</span>And so soon as the morning shall appear, and the sun shall come forth upon the earth, take ye every one his weapons, and go forth every valiant man out of the city, and set ye a captain over them, as though ye would go down into the field toward the <a href='#FN392'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>watch of the Assyrians; but go not down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_3">3&#160;</span>Then they shall take their armour, and shall go into their camp, and raise up the captains of the army of Assur, and shall run to the tent of Holofernes, but shall not find him: then fear shall fall upon them, and they shall flee before your face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_4">4&#160;</span>So ye, and all that inhabit the coast of Israel, shall pursue them, and overthrow them as they go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_5">5&#160;</span>But before ye do these things, call me <a href='#FN393'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Achior the Ammonite, that he may see and know him that despised the house of Israel, and that sent him to us as it were to his death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_6">6&#160;</span>Then they called Achior <a href='#FN394'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>out of the house of Ozias; and when he was come, and saw the head of Holofernes in a man’s hand in the assembly of the people, he fell down on his face, and <a href='#FN395'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>his spirit failed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_7">7&#160;</span>But when they had recovered him, <a href='#FN396'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>he fell at Judith’s feet, and reverenced her, and said, Blessed art thou in all the tabernacles of Juda, and in all nations, which hearing thy name shall be <a href='#FN397'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>astonished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_8">8&#160;</span>Now therefore tell me all the things that thou hast done in these days. Then Judith declared unto him in the midst of the people all that she had done, from the day that she went forth until that hour she spake unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_9">9&#160;</span>And when she had left off speaking, the people shouted with a loud voice, and made a joyful noise in their city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_10">10&#160;</span>And when Achior had seen all that the God of Israel had done, he believed in God greatly, and <a href='#FN398'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>circumcised the flesh of his foreskin, and was joined unto the house of Israel <a href='#FN399'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_11">11&#160;</span>And as soon as the morning arose, <a href='#FN400'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they hanged the head of Holofernes upon the wall, and <a href='#FN401'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>every man took his weapons, and they went forth by bands unto the <a href='#FN402'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>straits of the mountain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_12">12&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN403'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>when the Assyrians saw them, they sent to their leaders, which came to their captains and <a href='#FN404'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>tribunes, and to every one of their rulers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_13">13&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN405'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>they came to Holofernes’ tent, and said to <a href='#FN406'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>him that had the charge of all his things, Waken now our lord: for the slaves have been bold to come down against us to battle, that they may be <a href='#FN407'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>utterly destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_14">14&#160;</span>Then went in <a href='#FN408'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Bagoas, and knocked at the door of the tent; for he thought that he had slept with Judith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_15">15&#160;</span>But because none answered, he opened it, and went into the bedchamber, and found him cast upon the floor dead, and his head was taken from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Therefore he cried with a loud voice, with weeping, and sighing, and a mighty cry, and <a href='#FN410'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>rent his garments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_17">17&#160;</span>After he went into <a href='#FN411'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the tent where Judith lodged: and when he found her not, he leaped out to the people, and cried, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_18">18&#160;</span>These slaves have <a href='#FN412'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>dealt treacherously; one woman of the Hebrews hath brought shame upon the house of king Nabuchodonosor: for, behold, Holofernes lieth upon the ground without a head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT14_19">19&#160;</span>When the captains of the Assyrians’ army heard these words, they <a href='#FN413'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>rent their coats and their minds were wonderfully <a href='#FN414'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>troubled, and there was a cry and a very great noise throughout the camp.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_1">1&#160;</span>And when they that were in the tents heard, they were astonished at the thing that was done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_2">2&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN415'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>fear and trembling fell upon them, so that there was no man that durst abide in the sight of his neighbour, but rushing out all together, they fled into every way of the plain, and of the hill country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_3">3&#160;</span>They also <a href='#FN416'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>that had camped in the mountains round about Bethulia fled away. Then the children of Israel, every one that was a warrior among them, rushed out upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_4">4&#160;</span>Then sent Ozias to <a href='#FN417'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Betomasthem, and to Bebai, and <a href='#FN418'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Chobai, and Cola and to all the coasts of Israel, such as should tell the things that were done, and that all should rush forth upon their enemies to destroy them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_5">5&#160;</span>Now when the children of Israel heard it, they all fell upon them with one consent, and slew them unto <a href='#FN419'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Chobai: likewise also they that came from Jerusalem, and from all the hill country, (for men had told them what things were done in the camp of their enemies) and they that were in <a href='#FN420'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Galaad, and in <a href='#FN421'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Galilee, <a href='#FN422'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>chased them with a great slaughter, until they were past <a href='#FN423'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Damascus and the borders thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_6">6&#160;</span>And the residue that dwelt at Bethulia, fell upon the camp of Assur, and spoiled them, and were greatly enriched. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_7">7&#160;</span>And the children of Israel that returned from the slaughter had that which remained; and the villages and the cities, that were in the mountains and in the plain, gat many spoils: for the multitude was very great. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_8">8&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN424'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Joacim the high priest, and the <a href='#FN425'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>ancients of the children of Israel that dwelt in Jerusalem, came to behold the good things that God had shewed to Israel, and to see Judith, and to <a href='#FN426'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>salute her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_9">9&#160;</span>And when they came unto her, they blessed her with one accord, and said unto her, Thou art the exaltation of Jerusalem, thou art the great glory of Israel, thou art the great rejoicing of our nation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_10">10&#160;</span>Thou hast done all these things by thine hand: thou hast done much good to Israel, and God is pleased therewith: blessed be thou of the <a href='#FN427'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Almighty Lord for evermore. <a href='#FN428'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>And all the people said, So be it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_11">11&#160;</span>And the people spoiled the camp the space of thirty days: and they gave unto Judith Holofernes his tent, and all <a href='#FN429'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>his plate, and beds, and vessels, and all his <a href='#FN430'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>stuff: and she took it and laid it on her mule; and made ready her carts, and laid them thereon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_12">12&#160;</span>Then all the women of Israel ran together to see her, and blessed her, and made a dance among them for her: and she took <a href='#FN431'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>branches in her hand, and gave also to the women that were with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT15_13">13&#160;</span>And they put a garland of olive upon her and her maid that was with her, and she went before all the people <a href='#FN432'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>in the dance, leading all the women: and all the men of Israel followed in their armour <a href='#FN433'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>with garlands, and with songs in their mouths.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JT16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_1">1&#160;</span>Then Judith began to sing this thanksgiving in all Israel, and all the people sang after her <a href='#FN434'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>this song of praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_2">2&#160;</span>And Judith said, Begin unto my God with <a href='#FN435'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>timbrels, sing unto my Lord with <a href='#FN436'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>cymbals: tune unto him a <a href='#FN437'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>new psalm: exalt him, and call upon his name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_3">3&#160;</span>For God <a href='#FN438'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>breaketh the battles: for among the camps in the midst of the people he hath delivered me out of the hands of them that persecuted me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_4">4&#160;</span>Assur came out of the mountains <a href='#FN439'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>from the north, he came with ten thousands of his army, the multitude whereof stopped the torrents, and <a href='#FN440'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>their horsemen have covered the hills. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN441' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>He bragged that he would burn up my borders, and kill my young men with the sword, and <a href='#FN442'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>dash the sucking children against the ground, and make mine infants <a href='#FN443'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>as a prey, and my virgins as a spoil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_6">6&#160;</span>But the <a href='#FN444'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Almighty Lord hath disappointed them <a href='#FN445'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>by the hand of a woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_7">7&#160;</span>For the mighty one did not fall by the young men, neither did the sons of the <a href='#FN446'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Titans smite him, nor high <a href='#FN447'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>giants set upon him: but <a href='#FN448'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Judith the daughter of Merari weakened him with the beauty of her countenance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_8">8&#160;</span>For she put off <a href='#FN449'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the garment of her widowhood for the exaltation of those that were oppressed in Israel, and <a href='#FN450'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>anointed her face with ointment, and <a href='#FN451'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>bound her hair in a <a href='#FN452'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tire, and took a linen garment to deceive him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN453' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Her sandals ravished his eyes, her beauty took his mind prisoner, and the <a href='#FN454'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>fauchion passed through his neck. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_10">10&#160;</span>The <a href='#FN455'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Persians quaked at her boldness, and the <a href='#FN456'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Medes were <a href='#FN457'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN458'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>daunted at her hardiness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_11">11&#160;</span>Then my afflicted shouted for joy, and my weak ones cried aloud; but <a href='#FN459'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they were astonished: these lifted up their voices, but they were overthrown. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_12">12&#160;</span>The sons of the damsels have pierced them through, and wounded them as fugatives’ children: they perished by the <a href='#FN460'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>battle of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_13">13&#160;</span>I will sing unto the Lord <a href='#FN461'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a new song: <a href='#FN462'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>O Lord, thou art great and glorious, wonderful in strength, and invincible. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_14">14&#160;</span>Let all creatures serve thee: <a href='#FN463'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>for thou spakest, and they were made, <a href='#FN464'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>thou didst send forth thy spirit, and it created them, and there is none that can resist thy voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_15">15&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN465'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the mountains shall be moved from their foundations with the waters, the rocks <a href='#FN466'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>shall melt as wax at thy presence: yet thou art merciful to them that fear thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_16">16&#160;</span>For all sacrifice is too little for <a href='#FN467'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>a sweet savour unto thee, and all the fat is not sufficient for thy burnt offering: but he that feareth the Lord is great at all times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_17">17&#160;</span>Woe to the nations that rise up against my kindred! the Lord <a href='#FN468'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Almighty will take vengeance of them <a href='#FN469'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in the day of judgment, in putting fire and <a href='#FN470'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>worms in their flesh; and they shall feel them, and weep for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_18">18&#160;</span>Now as soon as they entered into Jerusalem, they worshipped the Lord; and as soon as the people were purified, they offered their burnt offerings, and their free offerings, and their gifts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_19">19&#160;</span>Judith also dedicated all the <a href='#FN471'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>stuff of Holofernes, which the people had given her, and gave the <a href='#FN472'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>canopy, which she had taken out of his bedchamber, for a <a href='#FN473'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>gift unto the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_20">20&#160;</span>So the people continued feasting in Jerusalem <a href='#FN474'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>before the sanctuary for the space of three months and Judith remained with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_21">21&#160;</span>After this time every one returned to his own inheritance, and Judith went to Bethulia, and remained in her own possession, and was in her time honourable in all the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_22">22&#160;</span>And many desired her, but none knew her all the days of her life, after that <a href='#FN475'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Manasses her husband was dead, and <a href='#FN476'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>was gathered to his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_23">23&#160;</span>But she increased more and more in honour, and waxed old in her husband’s house, being <a href='#FN477'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>an hundred and five years old, and made <a href='#FN478'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>her maid free; so she died in Bethulia: and they buried her in the <a href='#FN479'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN480'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>cave of her husband Manasses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_24">24&#160;</span>And the house of Israel lamented her <a href='#FN481'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>seven days: and before she died, she did distribute her goods to all them that were nearest of kindred to Manasses her husband, and to them that were the nearest of her kindred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JT16_25">25&#160;</span>And there was none that made the children of Israel any more afraid in the days of Judith, nor a long time after her death. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_15'>Tobit 14. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JON.xhtml#JH1_2'>Jonah 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a>. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_1"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB3_7'>Tobit 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_15'>ver. 15</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_14'>Tobit 1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB6_1'>Tobit 6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_11'>Isai. 11. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_21'>ch. 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_7"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_8'>Isai. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_48'>1 Esdr. 4. 48</a>. &amp; <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_55'>5. 55</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_20'>2 Esdr. 15. 20</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_13'>Ecclus. 24. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_12'>50. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_26'>Josh. 19. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>ch. 15. 5</a>. So <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_1'>Num. 32. 1</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS60_7'>Ps. 60. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_1'>Isai. 9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_8"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_24'>1 Kin. 16. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_9"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_23'>ch. 2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_9"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_26'>Num. 13. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_9"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>Gen. 15. 18</a>? or see <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_4'>Josh. 15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_9"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_11'>Gen. 47. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_9"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN45_10'>Gen. 45. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_10"><span class="notemark">w</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. of <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_22'>Num. 13. 22</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_12'>Ps. 78. 12</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_43'>43</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS19_11'>Isai. 19. 11</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS19_13'>13</a>. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK30_14'>Ezek. 30. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_10"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS9_6'>Hos. 9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_10"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_9'>2 Kin. 19. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP3_10'>Zeph. 3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_11"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_2'>ch. 11. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_22'>22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_21'>ch. 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_12"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_8'>Isai. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_12"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC18_18'>Acts 18. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_12"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_22'>22</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_1'>6. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_8'>7. 8</a>. See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_1'>Num. 22. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_1'>2 Chr. 20. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_12"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_2'>ch. 5. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_5'>5</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_5'>6. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_17'>7. 17</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>18</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S111_1'>1 Sam. 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_12"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_10'>Zech. 9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_13"><span class="notemark">dd</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_1'>ch. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_14"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_14"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_15"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT1_16"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_15'>Rev. 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S120_7'>1 Sam. 20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_3"><span class="notemark">dd</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>second</span> man. So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_6'>Esther 13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_28'>2 Kin. 18. 28</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS36_13'>Isai. 36. 13</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S120_7'>1 Sam. 20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">After the manner of the kings of Persia, to whom earth and water was wont to be given, to acknowledge that they were lords of land and sea. <span class='add'>Herodotus</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_18'>Isai. 13. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_12"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_7'>ch. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_14"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC8_27'>Acts 8. 27</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_15"><span class="notemark">j</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_5'>ver. 5</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_2'>ch. 7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_17"><span class="notemark">jj</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB9_2'>Tobit 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_17"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_10'>ch. 3. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>7. 18</a>. See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG18_21'>Judg. 18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>ch. 7. 18</a>. So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_5'>Ex. 10. 5</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_15'>15</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_5'>Num. 22. 5</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_11'>11</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_4'>ch. 16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_20"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_16'>ch. 1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_4'>Ex. 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_17'>Gen. 22. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_7'>ch. 1. 7</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>12</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_25'>ver. 25</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_36'>2 Macc. 4. 36</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC6_9'>Acts 6. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_23'>15. 23</a>, <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_41'>41</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_39'>21. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_3'>22. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_34'>23. 34</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_5'>27. 5</a>. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL1_21'>Gal. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_23"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_10'>Ezek. 27. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_23"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_10'>Ezek. 27. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_18'>Gen. 25. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_9'>ch. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_24"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_7'>ch. 5. 7</a>. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_25"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_7'>ch. 1. 7</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>12</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_25'>ver. 25</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_36'>2 Macc. 4. 36</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC6_9'>Acts 6. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_23'>15. 23</a>, <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_41'>41</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_39'>21. 39</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_3'>22. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_34'>23. 34</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_5'>27. 5</a>. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL1_21'>Gal. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_25"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN10_5'>Gen. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_26"><span class="notemark">v</span> 2.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG6_1'>Judg. 6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_27"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_8'>Isai. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_27"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_44'>Dan. 2. 44</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_44'>Matt. 21. 44</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_18'>Luke 20. 18</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_27"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_26'>Gen. 34. 26</a> marg. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_18'>Ecclus. 28. 18</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_28'>1 Macc. 5. 28</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_24'>Luke 21. 24</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_34'>Heb. 11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_21'>Matt. 15. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_28"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>1 Macc. 4. 15</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_28"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S15_1'>1 Sam. 5. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_15'>1 Macc. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT2_28"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_86'>1 Macc. 10. 86</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_60'>11. 60</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_33'>12. 33</a>. See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG1_18'>Judg. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_5'>ch. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_27'>ch. 2. 27</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_5'>ch. 4. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_28'>ch. 2. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_2'>5. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_22'>22</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_8'>7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_13'>ch. 15. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_13'>Acts 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_2'>ch. 16. 2</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_20'>Ex. 15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_2'>ch. 16. 2</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_20'>Ex. 15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_13'>Ex. 34. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Esdrelom</span>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>ch. 1. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_6'>4. 6</a> marg. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_3'>7. 3</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_16'>Josh. 17. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Dotea, Dothan</span>, Junius. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_17'>Gen. 37. 17</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>great saw</span>. Comp. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S113_23'>1 Sam. 13. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_4'>14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS18_24'>Josh. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_29'>2 Macc. 12. 29</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M212_30'>30</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_11'>Josh. 17. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT3_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_17'>ch. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_11'>2 Chr. 33. 11–13</a> ? or rather <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_19'>ch. 5. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>out of Judea</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_15'>2 Chr. 33. 15</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_16'>16</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_15'>2 Chr. 33. 15</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_16'>16</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_24'>1 Kin. 16. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_16'>1 Macc. 3. 16</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_11'>Josh. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_4'>ch. 15. 4</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_5'>5</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_23'>John 3. 23</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_27'>ch. 2. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_14'>14</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_8'>ch. 15. 8</a>. Comp. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_5'>1 Esdr. 5. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_6"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_10'>ch. 6. 10</a>, &amp;c. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_1'>7. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_6"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_4'>ch. 15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Esdrelom</span>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>plain</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_6"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_7"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_7'>ch. 6. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_1'>7. 1</a> (Gk.), <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_7'>7</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_11'>14. 11</a> (Gk.). So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>two against all</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_14'>14</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_8'>ch. 15. 8</a>. Comp. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_5'>1 Esdr. 5. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>governors</span>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_14'>ch. 11. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_8'>15. 8</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_10'>2 Macc. 1. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='2MA.xhtml#M24_44'>4. 44</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC5_21'>Acts 5. 21</a> in the Gk. Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_16'>ch. 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC12_5'>Acts 12. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC12_5'>Acts 12. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_31'>1 Kin. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_11"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZR.xhtml#ER10_1'>Ezra 10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_11"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>. See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_6'>Josh. 7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_11"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S221_10'>2 Sam. 21. 10</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_12"><span class="notemark">s</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_77'>1 Esdr. 8. 77</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_13"><span class="notemark">t</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_7'>Ex. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_13"><span class="notemark">u</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_20'>ch. 16. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_13"><span class="notemark">v</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ver. 8</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_14'>14</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_8'>ch. 15. 8</a>. Comp. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_5'>1 Esdr. 5. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_31'>1 Kin. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_14"><span class="notemark">w</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_38'>Ex. 29. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>. See Josh.<a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_7'>7</a>.<a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT4_15"><span class="notemark">x</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_4'>Ex. 28. 4</a>, &amp;c. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_12'>Ecclus. 45. 12</a> (Gk. and Engl.). Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>all</span> the <span class='add'>top</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_5'>ch. 4. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_1"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_20'>ver. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_6'>ch. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_5'>ch. 6. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_9'>11. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_5'>14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN11_31'>Gen. 11. 31</a>. Comp. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_2'>Acts. 7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_2'>Josh. 24. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>went out of</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB10_11'>Tobit 10. 11</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_19'>ch. 6. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_17'>11. 17</a>. 1 Macc. (<a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_18'>3. 18</a>. &amp;) <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_55'>4. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_9'>Acts 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_1'>Gen. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_2'>Gen. 13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_6'>Gen. 46. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_7'>Ex. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_8'>Ex. 1. 8–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_10'>Ex 1. 10</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_19'>Acts 7. 19</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_23'>Ex. 2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_0'>ch. 7</a>–<a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_0'>ch. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_12"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_31'>Ex. 12. 31</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_13"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>EX. 14. 21</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_1'>Ex. 19. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>into the way</span> of the wilderness <span class='add'>of Sina</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_14"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_26'>Numb. 13. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_1'>20. 1</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_19'>Deut. 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_15"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_25'>Numb. 21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_15"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_25'>Numb. 21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_15"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_16'>Josh. 3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_15"><span class="notemark">z</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_40'>Josh. 10. 40</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_16"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_8'>Josh. 12. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_16"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_8'>Josh. 12. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_16"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_8'>Josh. 12. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_16"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_8'>Josh. 12. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_16"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_2'>Gen. 34. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_16"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_1'>Deut. 7. 1</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_10'>Josh. 3. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_11'>24. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_17"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS5_5'>Ps. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_11'>Judg. 2. 11–15</a>. &amp; <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG3_7'>3. 7</a>, <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG3_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_18"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_9'>2 Kin. 25. 9–11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_19"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_3'>ch. 4. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER1_1'>Ezra 1. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>have their dwellings</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_20"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_1'>ver. 1</a>. Rather as <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_13'>Rom. 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_22"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_15'>Rev. 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_22"><span class="notemark">ii</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_22"><span class="notemark">ii</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_23"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_4'>Ex. 18. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>against a mighty army</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_23"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_15'>ch. 2. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_11'>7. 11</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_12'>16. 12</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_9'>Wisd. 12. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT5_24"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_12'>ch. 10. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_21'>ch. 5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_33'>2 Kin. 18. 33–35</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS36_18'>Isai. 36. 18–20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_7'>Isai. 34. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_5"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_12'>ch. 5. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K122_27'>1 Kin. 22. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_6'>Gen. 4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_6'>ch. 4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_7'>7</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_12'>12</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_17'>17</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_7'>12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_21'>ver. 21</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_23'>ch. 7. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_10'>8. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_6'>10. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_12'>13. 12</a> in the Gk. See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E16_8'>1 Esdr. 6. 8</a>. Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ch. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_19"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_8'>ch. 5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS84_9'>Ps. 84. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S23_20'>2 Sam. 3. 20</a> (Gk.). <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_10'>ch. 12. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT6_21"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_21'>ver. 21</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_23'>ch. 7. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_10'>8. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_6'>10. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_12'>13. 12</a> in the Gk. See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E16_8'>1 Esdr. 6. 8</a>. Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ch. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_3'>ch. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_15'>ch. 2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_7'>ch. 12. 7</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_11'>ch. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class='add'>from Dothaim</span>, Junius.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_6'>ch. 4. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_3'>8. 3</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_4'>ch. 4. 4</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>Bean field</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_3"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_4'>Numb. 22. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_7"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_3'>ch. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_7'>ch. 12. 7</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_11'>ch. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>1 Macc. 5. 45</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_34'>Heb. 11. 34</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_3'>1 Macc. 5. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_65'>65</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_6'>ch. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_11"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_12"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_7'>ch. 12. 7</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_11'>ch. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_17"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>1 Macc. 5. 45</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_34'>Heb. 11. 34</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_17"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_7'>ch. 12. 7</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_11'>ch. 6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_18"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_3'>1 Macc. 5. 3</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_65'>65</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_12'>ch. 1. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_18"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_6'>ch. 4. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_3'>8. 3</a>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_19'>ch. 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_17'>ch. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_20"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_20'>20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M15_45'>1 Macc. 5. 45</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_34'>Heb. 11. 34</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>pits</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R226_10'>2 Chr. 26. 10</a> marg. (Gk.). <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_31'>ch. 8. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_21"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK4_11'>Ezek. 4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_22"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_11'>Tobit 14. 11</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_9'>Luke 16. 9</a>? in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_15'>ch. 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_23"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_16'>ch. 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_21'>Ex. 5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_25"><span class="notemark">x</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_30'>Deut. 32. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_26"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_77'>1 Esdr. 8. 77</a>. Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_14'>2 Esdr. 2. 14</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_26'>Deut. 4. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_28"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_6'>Ps. 106. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>lest he do</span>, meaning Olofernes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_28"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_30"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_30"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_13'>ch. 14. 13</a>. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H12_16'>1 Thess. 2. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT7_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Samaliel</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='RUT.xhtml#RT1_22'>Ruth 1. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2KI.xhtml#K24_18'>2 Kin. 4. 18</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K24_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_11'>Cant. 8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_5'>ch. 4. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC10_9'>Acts 10. 9</a>. See <a href='2SA.xhtml#S211_2'>2 Sam. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_10'>ch. 4. 10</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_14'>14</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_1'>9. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>10. 3</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K120_31'>1 Kin. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_14'>Gen. 38. 14</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_19'>19</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_8'>16. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_6"><span class="notemark">k</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_42'>Mark 15. 42</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_6"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_13'>Isai. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_6"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_13'>Isai. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>and she kept them</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_19'>ch. 7. 19</a>, (<a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_22'>22</a>).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_26'>ch. 7. 26</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_30'>30</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_31'>31</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_26'>ch. 7. 26</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_30'>30</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_31'>31</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_15'>ch. 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_10"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_16'>ch. 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_10'>Acts 15. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_11'>1 Cor. 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_16'>1 Cor. 2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_14"><span class="notemark">u</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_11'>ch. 11. 11</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT31_29'>Deut. 31. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>engage</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_16"><span class="notemark">x</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_19'>Numb. 23. 19</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_16"><span class="notemark">x</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_19'>Numb. 23. 19</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>town</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_18"><span class="notemark">y</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_11'>Judg. 2. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_1'>4. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG6_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fear</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_22"><span class="notemark">z</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_13'>Rom. 14. 13</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_26"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_1'>Gen. 22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_26"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_1'>Gen. 22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_26"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_2'>Gen. 28. 2</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_7'>7</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN29_20'>29. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_7'>31. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_27"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_12'>Prov. 3. 12</a>. See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_6'>Heb. 12. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_30"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_21'>ch. 7. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_33"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_10'>ver. 10</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_2'>ch. 10. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_5'>5</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_17'>17</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_9'>13. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_23'>16. 23</a>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_2'>Esther 15. 2</a>, <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_7'>7</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_33"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_16'>Ex 3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_35"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_17'>1 Sam. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT8_36"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_11'>ch. 4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_11'>ch. 4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_8'>Ex. 30. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_2'>Gen. 34. 2</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_25'>25</a>. But comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_7'>Gen. 49. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_2"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_7'>Gen. 34. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_28'>Gen. 34. 28</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_6'>2 Esdr. 2. 6</a>. So <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB3_4'>Tobit 3. 4</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_27'>ch. 7. 27</a>. See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_77'>1 Esdr. 8. 77</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_28'>Gen. 34. 28</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_28'>Gen. 34. 28</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN34_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_11'>Num. 25. 11</a> [marg.].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_45'>1 Sam. 17. 45</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_47'>47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_7"><span class="notemark">j</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_3'>ch. 16. 3</a>. So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_3'>Ex. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_7"><span class="notemark">j</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_3'>ch. 16. 3</a>. So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_3'>Ex. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_8"><span class="notemark">jj</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a> (Gk.)?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX27_2'>Ex. 27. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_21'>Judg. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG5_26'>5. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_8'>ch. 12. 8</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_9'>Judg. 4. 9</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_15'>ch. 13. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_6'>16. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_2'>Judg. 7. 2</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R214_11'>2 Chr. 14. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_8'>16. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_6'>20. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_11"><span class="notemark">p</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_2'>Esther 15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_11"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_19'>Esther 14. 19</a>(Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT9_12"><span class="notemark">r</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_18'>ch. 13. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_1'>ch. 9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_20'>2 Sam. 12. 20</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_8'>ch. 16. 8</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS23_5'>Ps. 23. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_20'>2 Sam. 12. 20</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_8'>ch. 16. 8</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS23_5'>Ps. 23. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>mitre</span>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_8'>ch. 16. 8</a>. Not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>. See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK24_17'>Ezek. 24. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_9'>ch. 16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_2'>ch. 8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_9'>ch. 16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_21'>Ecclus. 21. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_22'>Gen. 24. 22</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_21'>Isai. 3. 21</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_22'>Gen. 24. 22</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_21'>Isai. 3. 21</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_12'>1 Kin. 17. 12</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_14'>14</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_5"><span class="notemark">j</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S125_18'>1 Sam. 25. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S130_12'>30. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>wrapped</span>, or, <span class='add'>packed</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_6"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_33'>ch. 8. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_6"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_15'>ch. 6. 15</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_6'>ch. 11. 6</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_5'>13. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_11"><span class="notemark">mm</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_2'>ch. 14. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_24'>ch. 5. 24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_2'>Wisd. 19. 2</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_3'>Acts 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>and they prepared</span> a chariot <span class='add'>for her</span>. Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_44'>1 Kin. 18. 44</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_11'>ch. 15. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_30'>Acts 21. 30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_20"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_21"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_9'>ch. 13. 9</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_15'>15</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_19'>16. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_22"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT10_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_7'>ch. 14. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_22'>ver. 22</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_33'>ch. 8. 33</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>10. 20</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_22'>22</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_5'>12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_5"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_33'>ch. 8. 33</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>10. 20</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_22'>22</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_5'>12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_6"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_8'>ch. 10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_15'>Gen. 42. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_7"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_16'>Baruch 3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in favour</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>gat him</span>. So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_44'>1 Macc. 6. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_12'>Gen. 12. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_20'>ch. 5. 20</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_14'>ch. 8. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_12'>Num. 18. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_12'>Num. 18. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ch. 4. 8</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_17"><span class="notemark">j</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_31'>John 9. 31</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_17"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_8'>ch. 5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_17"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_37'>Luke 2. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_17'>Num. 27. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_19"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_7'>Ex. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>bark</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>these</span> things <span class='add'>have I spoken</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. construction as <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_45'>Luke 1. 45</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC9_6'>Acts 9. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_42'>13. 42</a>, <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_46'>46</a>. &amp; <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_10'>22. 10</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_19'>Heb. 9. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_22"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_22'>ver. 22</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT11_23"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='RUT.xhtml#RT1_16'>Ruth 1. 16</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_26'>Dan. 6. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_11'>ch. 15. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_2"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_17'>Esther 14. 17</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_10'>Tobit 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_5'>ch. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_26'>1 Sam. 1. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_17'>14. 17</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_24'>Ex. 14. 24</a>. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S111_11'>1 Sam. 11. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_10'>ch. 9. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_17'>14. 17</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_21'>ch. 6. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_11"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_17'>14. 17</a>. Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_1'>ch. 13. 1</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_16"><span class="notemark">k</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_28'>Matt. 5. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT12_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_10'>ch. 12. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_3'>1 Esdr. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_13'>ch. 12. 13</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_20'>ch. 12. 20</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_20'>Ecclus. 31. 20</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_13'>Jer. 6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_54'>Luke 1. 54</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_8'>ch. 10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_6"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_9'>ch. 16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_51'>1 Sam. 17. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_21'>ch. 10. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. not as <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_20'>Matt. 13. 20</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_30'>Mark 1. 30</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_5'>ch. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_16'>ch. 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_13"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_13'>Jer. 6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_20'>Matt. 13. 20</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_30'>Mark 1. 30</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_21'>ch. 10. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_10'>ch. 9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='RUT.xhtml#RT3_13'>Ruth 3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E16_31'>1 Esdr. 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_12'>ch. 9. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT13_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_10'>ch. 15. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_35'>2 Macc. 15. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_11'>ch. 10. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_21'>ch. 6. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_5'>1 Kin. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_23'>ch. 10. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_7"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_7'>ver. 7</a> (Gk.). <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_48'>Ex. 12. 48</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_49'>49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_6'>Deut. 34. 6</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_9'>Josh. 4. 9</a>. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG1_26'>Judg. 1. 26</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_8'>Matt. 27. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT28_15'>28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ascents</span>. See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1MA.xhtml#M116_19'>1 Macc. 16. 19</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_14'>ver. 14</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_11'>ch. 12. 11</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_13'>13</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_1'>13. 1</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_13"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_30'>ch. 7. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_14'>ver. 14</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_11'>ch. 12. 11</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_13'>13</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_1'>13. 1</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>Then</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_13'>Gen. 44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_5'>ch. 12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR3_20'>Jer. 3. 20</a> (Gk.). So <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_23'>Judg. 9. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_19"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN44_13'>Gen. 44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT14_19"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_7'>ver. 7</a> (Gk.). <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_3'>ch. 14. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_1'>ch. 7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_6'>ch. 4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_4'>ch. 4. 4</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_4'>ch. 4. 4</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>ch. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_8'>ch. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>overcame</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_8'>Isai. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_6'>ch. 4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_8'>ch. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG18_15'>Judg. 18. 15</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_20'>ch. 13. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT12_1'>ch. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_19'>ch. 16. 19</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_31'>Luke 17. 31</a> (Gk.&amp; Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M210_7'>2 Macc. 10. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_7'>ch. 3. 7</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_20'>Ex. 15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT15_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_7'>ch. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>this praising</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT3_7'>ch. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E15_59'>1 Esdr. 5. 59</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_54'>1 Macc. 4. 54</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS150_5'>Ps. 150. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>psalm and praise</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_7'>ch. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_21'>ch. 2. 21–27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_19'>ch. 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_9'>Ex. 15. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K28_12'>2 Kin. 8. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_77'>1 Esdr. 8. 77</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_6"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_10'>ch. 9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_7"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_18'>2 Sam. 5. 18</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_22'>22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_7"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R111_15'>1 Chr. 11. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='1CH.xhtml#R114_9'>14. 9</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_4'>Gen. 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_7"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_8"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_8"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_8"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>mitre.</span> <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_3'>ch. 10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_4'>ch. 10. 4</a>. Comp. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS7_1'>Cant. 7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_9"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_6'>ch. 13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_7'>ch. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_10"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_1'>ch. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>confounded</span>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_7'>ch. 14. 7</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT14_19'>19</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_10"><span class="notemark">t</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_8'>ch. 9. 8</a> (Gk.)?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[That is,] <span class='add'>the Assyrians</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_12"><span class="notemark">u</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT5_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a song of praise</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_13"><span class="notemark">w</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_11'>Ex. 15. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_14"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_9'>Ps. 33. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_3'>Gen. 1. 3</a>, &amp;c. So <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT9_12'>ch. 9. 12</a>. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_10'>Esther 13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_14"><span class="notemark">y</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_30'>Ps. 104. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_15"><span class="notemark">z</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_8'>2 Sam. 22. 8</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S222_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_15"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS68_2'>Ps. 68. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_16"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_2'>Eph. 5. 2</a>. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP4_18'>Phil. 4. 18</a> in the Gk. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_16'>Ecclus. 45. 16</a>. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_21'>Gen. 8. 21</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_17"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_17"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ESG.xhtml#EG10_11'>Esther 10. 11</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_15'>Matt. 10. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_22'>11. 22</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_24'>24</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_36'>12. 36</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_11'>Mark 6. 11</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_9'>2 Pet. 2. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_7'>3. 7</a>. <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN4_17'>1 John 4. 17</a>. So <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_6'>Jude 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_17"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_22'>Job 14. 22</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_24'>Isai. 66. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_19"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT15_11'>ch. 15. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_19"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_21'>ch. 10. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_19"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_16'>2 Macc. 9. 16</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_5'>Luke 21. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_20"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_13'>ch. 4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_22"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_2'>ch. 8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_22"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_8'>Gen. 25. 8</a>. See <a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_1'>Bel &amp;amp; Drag. 1</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_69'>1 Macc. 2. 69</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_23"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_11'>Tobit 14. 11</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB14_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_23"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT8_33'>ch. 8. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sepulchre</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_23"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN23_19'>Gen. 23. 19</a>, &amp;c. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN11_38'>John 11. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JT16_24"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN50_10'>Gen. 50. 10</a>. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S131_13'>1 Sam. 31. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_12'>Ecclus. 22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

