<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Job 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Job</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB42_0'>42</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JB0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Job  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JB1_1">1&#160;</span> There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Job; and that man was <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_2">2&#160;</span> And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_3">3&#160;</span> His <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and a very great <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>household; so that this man was the greatest of all the <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>men of the east.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_4">4&#160;</span> And his sons went and feasted <span class='add'>in their</span> houses, every one his day; and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_5">5&#160;</span> And it was so, when the days of <span class='add'>their</span> feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings <span class='add'>according</span> to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continually.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Satan came also <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>among them.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, From <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Hast thou considered my servant Job, that <span class='add'>there is</span> none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?
<span class="verse" id="JB1_9">9&#160;</span> Then Satan answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought?
<span class="verse" id="JB1_10">10&#160;</span> Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his hands, and his <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>substance is increased in the land.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_11">11&#160;</span> But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and he will curse thee to thy face.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath <span class='add'>is</span> in thy <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And there was a day when his sons and his daughters <span class='add'>were</span> eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house:
<span class="verse" id="JB1_14">14&#160;</span> And there came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding beside them:
<span class="verse" id="JB1_15">15&#160;</span> And the Sabeans fell <span class='add'>upon them</span>, and took them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_16">16&#160;</span>While he <span class='add'>was</span> yet speaking, there came also another, and said, <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>The fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_17">17&#160;</span>While he <span class='add'>was</span> yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans made out three bands, and <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fell upon the camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_18">18&#160;</span>While he <span class='add'>was</span> yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters <span class='add'>were</span> eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house:
<span class="verse" id="JB1_19">19&#160;</span> And, behold, there came a great wind <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_20">20&#160;</span> Then Job arose, and rent his <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped,
<span class="verse" id="JB1_21">21&#160;</span> And said, <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return thither: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath taken away; blessed be the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB1_22">22&#160;</span> In all this Job sinned not, nor <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>charged God foolishly.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_1">1&#160;</span> Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Satan answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that <span class='add'>there is</span> none like him in the earth, <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to destroy him without cause.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_4">4&#160;</span> And Satan answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_5">5&#160;</span> But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, Behold, he <span class='add'>is</span> in thine hand; <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>but save his life.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_7">7&#160;</span>¶ So went Satan forth from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_8">8&#160;</span> And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_10">10&#160;</span> But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_12">12&#160;</span> And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.
<span class="verse" id="JB2_13">13&#160;</span> So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that <span class='add'>his</span> grief was very great.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_1">1&#160;</span> After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_2">2&#160;</span> And Job <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spake, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB3_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night <span class='add'>in which</span> it was said, There is a man child conceived.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_4">4&#160;</span> Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_5">5&#160;</span> Let darkness and the shadow of death <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it; <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>let the blackness of the day terrify it.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_6">6&#160;</span>As <span class='add'>for</span> that night, let darkness seize upon it; <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_7">7&#160;</span> Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_8">8&#160;</span> Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>their mourning.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_9">9&#160;</span> Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for light, but <span class='add'>have</span> none; neither let it see <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the dawning of the day:
<span class="verse" id="JB3_10">10&#160;</span> Because it shut not up the doors of my <span class='add'>mother’s</span> womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_11">11&#160;</span> Why died I not from the womb? <span class='add'>why</span> did I <span class='add'>not</span> give up the ghost when I came out of the belly?
<span class="verse" id="JB3_12">12&#160;</span> Why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck?
<span class="verse" id="JB3_13">13&#160;</span> For now should I have lain still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest,
<span class="verse" id="JB3_14">14&#160;</span> With kings and counsellors of the earth, which built desolate places for themselves;
<span class="verse" id="JB3_15">15&#160;</span> Or with princes that had gold, who filled their houses with silver:
<span class="verse" id="JB3_16">16&#160;</span> Or as an hidden untimely birth I had not been; as infants <span class='add'>which</span> never saw light.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_17">17&#160;</span> There the wicked cease <span class='add'>from</span> troubling; and there the <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>weary be at rest.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There</span> the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_19">19&#160;</span> The small and great are there; and the servant <span class='add'>is</span> free from his master. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_20">20&#160;</span> Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter <span class='add'>in</span> soul;
<span class="verse" id="JB3_21">21&#160;</span> Which <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>long for death, but it <span class='add'>cometh</span> not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures;
<span class="verse" id="JB3_22">22&#160;</span> Which rejoice exceedingly, <span class='add'>and</span> are glad, when they can find the grave?
<span class="verse" id="JB3_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Why is light given</span> to a man whose way is hid, <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and whom God hath hedged in?
<span class="verse" id="JB3_24">24&#160;</span> For my sighing cometh <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the waters.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_25">25&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me.
<span class="verse" id="JB3_26">26&#160;</span> I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet trouble came.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_1">1&#160;</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB4_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> we assay <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who can withhold himself from speaking?
<span class="verse" id="JB4_3">3&#160;</span> Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the weak hands.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_4">4&#160;</span> Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast strengthened <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the feeble knees.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_5">5&#160;</span> But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee, and thou art troubled.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not <span class='add'>this</span> thy fear, thy <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>confidence, thy hope, and the uprightness of thy ways? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_7">7&#160;</span> Remember, I pray thee, who <span class='add'>ever</span> perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off?
<span class="verse" id="JB4_8">8&#160;</span> Even as I have seen, <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_9">9&#160;</span> By the blast of God they perish, and <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_10">10&#160;</span> The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions, are broken.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_11">11&#160;</span> The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion’s whelps are scattered abroad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_12">12&#160;</span> Now a thing was <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a little thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_13">13&#160;</span> In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falleth on men,
<span class="verse" id="JB4_14">14&#160;</span> Fear <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>came upon me, and trembling, which made <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all my bones to shake.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_15">15&#160;</span> Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up:
<span class="verse" id="JB4_16">16&#160;</span> It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image <span class='add'>was</span> before mine eyes, <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>there was</span> silence, and I heard a voice, <span class='add'>saying</span>,
<span class="verse" id="JB4_17">17&#160;</span> Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be more pure than his maker?
<span class="verse" id="JB4_18">18&#160;</span> Behold, he <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>put no trust in his servants; <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and his angels he charged with folly:
<span class="verse" id="JB4_19">19&#160;</span> How much less <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><span class='add'>in</span> them that dwell in <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>houses of clay, whose foundation <span class='add'>is</span> in the dust, <span class='add'>which</span> are crushed before the moth?
<span class="verse" id="JB4_20">20&#160;</span> They are <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB4_21">21&#160;</span> Doth not their excellency <span class='add'>which is</span> in them go away? they die, even without wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_1">1&#160;</span> Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of the saints wilt thou <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>turn?
<span class="verse" id="JB5_2">2&#160;</span> For wrath killeth the foolish man, and <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>envy slayeth the silly one.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_3">3&#160;</span> I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his habitation.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_4">4&#160;</span> His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither <span class='add'>is there</span> any to deliver <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_5">5&#160;</span> Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_6">6&#160;</span> Although <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground;
<span class="verse" id="JB5_7">7&#160;</span> Yet man is born unto <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trouble, as <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the sparks fly upward.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_8">8&#160;</span> I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause:
<span class="verse" id="JB5_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Which doeth great things <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and unsearchable; marvellous things <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>without number:
<span class="verse" id="JB5_10">10&#160;</span> Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon the <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fields:
<span class="verse" id="JB5_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cannot perform <span class='add'>their</span> enterprise.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> They <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as in the night.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_15">15&#160;</span> But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, happy <span class='add'>is</span> the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty:
<span class="verse" id="JB5_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_20">20&#160;</span> In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the power of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_21">21&#160;</span> Thou shalt be hid <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_22">22&#160;</span> At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_24">24&#160;</span> And thou shalt know <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that thy tabernacle <span class='add'>shall be</span> in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sin.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_25">25&#160;</span> Thou shalt know also that thy seed <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_26">26&#160;</span> Thou shalt come to <span class='add'>thy</span> grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cometh in in his season.
<span class="verse" id="JB5_27">27&#160;</span> Lo this, we have searched it, so it <span class='add'>is;</span> hear it, and know thou <span class='add'>it</span> <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for thy good.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_1">1&#160;</span> But Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB6_2">2&#160;</span> Oh that my grief were throughly weighed, and my calamity <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>laid in the balances together!
<span class="verse" id="JB6_3">3&#160;</span> For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>my words are swallowed up.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the arrows of the Almighty <span class='add'>are</span> within me, the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_5">5&#160;</span> Doth the wild ass bray <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over his fodder?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_6">6&#160;</span> Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or is there <span class='add'>any</span> taste in the white of an egg?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_7">7&#160;</span>The things <span class='add'>that</span> my soul refused to touch <span class='add'>are</span> as my sorrowful meat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_8">8&#160;</span> Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant <span class='add'>me</span> <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the thing that I long for!
<span class="verse" id="JB6_9">9&#160;</span> Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!
<span class="verse" id="JB6_10">10&#160;</span> Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_11">11&#160;</span>What <span class='add'>is</span> my strength, that I should hope? and what <span class='add'>is</span> mine end, that I should prolong my life?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> my strength the strength of stones? or <span class='add'>is</span> my flesh <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of brass?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> To him that is afflicted pity <span class='add'>should be shewed</span> from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_15">15&#160;</span> My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, <span class='add'>and</span> as the stream of brooks they pass away;
<span class="verse" id="JB6_16">16&#160;</span> Which are blackish by reason of the ice, <span class='add'>and</span> wherein the snow is hid:
<span class="verse" id="JB6_17">17&#160;</span> What time they wax warm, <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they vanish: <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when it is hot, they are <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consumed out of their place.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_18">18&#160;</span> The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_19">19&#160;</span> The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_20">20&#160;</span> They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> For now ye are <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>nothing; ye see <span class='add'>my</span> casting down, and are afraid.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_22">22&#160;</span> Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your substance?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_23">23&#160;</span> Or, Deliver me from the enemy’s hand? or, Redeem me from the hand of the mighty?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_24">24&#160;</span> Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_25">25&#160;</span> How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_26">26&#160;</span> Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate, <span class='add'>which are</span> as wind?
<span class="verse" id="JB6_27">27&#160;</span> Yea, <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ye overwhelm the fatherless, and ye dig <span class='add'>a pit</span> for your friend.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_28">28&#160;</span> Now therefore be content, look upon me; for <span class='add'>it is</span> <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>evident unto you if I lie.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_29">29&#160;</span> Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my righteousness <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in it.
<span class="verse" id="JB6_30">30&#160;</span> Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my taste discern perverse things?</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is there</span> not <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an appointed time to man upon earth? <span class='add'>are not</span> his days also like the days of an hireling?
<span class="verse" id="JB7_2">2&#160;</span> As a servant <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for <span class='add'>the reward of</span> his work:
<span class="verse" id="JB7_3">3&#160;</span> So am I made to possess months of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_4">4&#160;</span> When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_5">5&#160;</span> My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken, and become loathsome.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, and are spent without hope. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_7">7&#160;</span> O remember that my life <span class='add'>is</span> wind: mine eye <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall no more <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>see good.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_8">8&#160;</span> The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no <span class='add'>more:</span> thine eyes <span class='add'>are</span> upon me, and <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down to the grave shall come up no <span class='add'>more</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_10">10&#160;</span> He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any more.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Am</span> I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me?
<span class="verse" id="JB7_13">13&#160;</span> When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint;
<span class="verse" id="JB7_14">14&#160;</span> Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions:
<span class="verse" id="JB7_15">15&#160;</span> So that my soul chooseth strangling, <span class='add'>and</span> death rather <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>than my life.
<span class="verse" id="JB7_16">16&#160;</span> I loathe <span class='add'>it;</span> I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days <span class='add'>are</span> vanity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>What <span class='add'>is</span> man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him?
<span class="verse" id="JB7_18">18&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> thou shouldest visit him every morning, <span class='add'>and</span> try him every moment?
<span class="verse" id="JB7_19">19&#160;</span> How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?
<span class="verse" id="JB7_20">20&#160;</span> I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to myself?
<span class="verse" id="JB7_21">21&#160;</span> And why dost thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I <span class='add'>shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_1">1&#160;</span> Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB8_2">2&#160;</span> How long wilt thou speak these <span class='add'>things</span>? and <span class='add'>how long shall</span> the words of thy mouth <span class='add'>be like</span> a strong wind?
<span class="verse" id="JB8_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty pervert justice?
<span class="verse" id="JB8_4">4&#160;</span> If thy children have sinned against him, and he have cast them away <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for their transgression;
<span class="verse" id="JB8_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou wouldest seek unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty;
<span class="verse" id="JB8_6">6&#160;</span>If thou <span class='add'>wert</span> pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_7">7&#160;</span> Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers:
<span class="verse" id="JB8_9">9&#160;</span>(For <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>we <span class='add'>are but of</span> yesterday, and know <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>nothing, because our days upon earth <span class='add'>are</span> a shadow:)
<span class="verse" id="JB8_10">10&#160;</span> Shall not they teach thee, <span class='add'>and</span> tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?
<span class="verse" id="JB8_11">11&#160;</span> Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water?
<span class="verse" id="JB8_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Whilst it <span class='add'>is</span> yet in his greenness, <span class='add'>and</span> not cut down, it withereth before any <span class='add'>other</span> herb.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_13">13&#160;</span>So <span class='add'>are</span> the paths of all that forget God; and the <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hypocrite’s hope shall perish:
<span class="verse" id="JB8_14">14&#160;</span> Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a spider’s web.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_15">15&#160;</span> He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall hold it fast, but it shall not endure.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_16">16&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is</span> green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his garden.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_17">17&#160;</span> His roots are wrapped about the heap, <span class='add'>and</span> seeth the place of stones.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_18">18&#160;</span> If he destroy him from his place, then <span class='add'>it</span> shall deny him, <span class='add'>saying</span>, I have not seen thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, this <span class='add'>is</span> the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall others grow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_20">20&#160;</span> Behold, God will not cast away a perfect <span class='add'>man</span>, neither will he <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>help the evil doers:
<span class="verse" id="JB8_21">21&#160;</span> Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rejoicing.
<span class="verse" id="JB8_22">22&#160;</span> They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling place of the wicked <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall come to nought.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_1">1&#160;</span> Then Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB9_2">2&#160;</span> I know <span class='add'>it is</span> so of a truth: but how should <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>man be just <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with God?
<span class="verse" id="JB9_3">3&#160;</span> If he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He is</span> wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened <span class='add'>himself</span> against him, and hath prospered?
<span class="verse" id="JB9_5">5&#160;</span> Which removeth the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_6">6&#160;</span> Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_7">7&#160;</span> Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the stars.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>waves of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Which maketh <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without number.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_11">11&#160;</span> Lo, he goeth by me, and I see <span class='add'>him</span> not: he passeth on also, but I perceive him not.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, he taketh away, <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who can hinder him? who will say unto him, What doest thou?
<span class="verse" id="JB9_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> God will not withdraw his anger, the <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>proud helpers do stoop under him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_14">14&#160;</span> How much less shall I answer him, <span class='add'>and</span> choose out my words <span class='add'>to reason</span> with him?
<span class="verse" id="JB9_15">15&#160;</span> Whom, though I were righteous, <span class='add'>yet</span> would I not answer, <span class='add'>but</span> I would make supplication to my judge.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_16">16&#160;</span> If I had called, and he had answered me; <span class='add'>yet</span> would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_17">17&#160;</span> For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_18">18&#160;</span> He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with bitterness.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_19">19&#160;</span>If <span class='add'>I speak</span> of strength, lo, <span class='add'>he is</span> strong: and if of judgment, who shall set me a time <span class='add'>to plead</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JB9_20">20&#160;</span> If I justify myself, mine own mouth shall condemn me: <span class='add'>if I say</span>, I <span class='add'>am</span> perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Though</span> I <span class='add'>were</span> perfect, <span class='add'>yet</span> would I not know my soul: I would despise my life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_22">22&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> one <span class='add'>thing</span>, therefore I said <span class='add'>it</span>, He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_23">23&#160;</span> If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_24">24&#160;</span> The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, <span class='add'>and</span> who <span class='add'>is</span> he? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_25">25&#160;</span> Now my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_26">26&#160;</span> They are passed away as the <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>swift ships: as the eagle <span class='add'>that</span> hasteth to the prey.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_27">27&#160;</span> If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my heaviness, and comfort <span class='add'>myself:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_28">28&#160;</span> I am afraid of all my sorrows, I know that thou wilt not hold me innocent.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> I be wicked, why then labour I in vain?
<span class="verse" id="JB9_30">30&#160;</span> If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean;
<span class="verse" id="JB9_31">31&#160;</span> Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>abhor me.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_32">32&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>he is</span> not a man, as I <span class='add'>am, that</span> I should answer him, <span class='add'>and</span> we should come together in judgment.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_33">33&#160;</span> Neither is there <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>any <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>daysman betwixt us, <span class='add'>that</span> might lay his hand upon us both.
<span class="verse" id="JB9_34">34&#160;</span> Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify me:
<span class="verse" id="JB9_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> would I speak, and not fear him; <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>but <span class='add'>it is</span> not so with me.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_1">1&#160;</span> My soul is <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_2">2&#160;</span> I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it</span> good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou shouldest despise <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
<span class="verse" id="JB10_4">4&#160;</span> Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man seeth?
<span class="verse" id="JB10_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Are</span> thy days as the days of man? <span class='add'>are</span> thy years as man’s days,
<span class="verse" id="JB10_6">6&#160;</span> That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin?
<span class="verse" id="JB10_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and <span class='add'>there is</span> none that can deliver out of thine hand.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_8">8&#160;</span> Thine hands <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou dost destroy me.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_9">9&#160;</span> Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again?
<span class="verse" id="JB10_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>curdled me like cheese?
<span class="verse" id="JB10_11">11&#160;</span> Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fenced me with bones and sinews.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_12">12&#160;</span> Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_13">13&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>things</span> hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this <span class='add'>is</span> with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_14">14&#160;</span> If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_15">15&#160;</span> If I be wicked, woe unto me; and <span class='add'>if</span> I be righteous, <span class='add'>yet</span> will I not lift up my head. <span class='add'>I am</span> full of confusion; therefore see thou mine affliction;
<span class="verse" id="JB10_16">16&#160;</span> For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion: and again thou shewest thyself marvellous upon me.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_17">17&#160;</span> Thou renewest <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war <span class='add'>are</span> against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me!
<span class="verse" id="JB10_19">19&#160;</span> I should have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.
<span class="verse" id="JB10_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>Are</span> not my days few? cease <span class='add'>then, and</span> let me alone, that I may take comfort a little,
<span class="verse" id="JB10_21">21&#160;</span> Before I go <span class='add'>whence</span> I shall not return, <span class='add'>even</span> to the land of darkness and the shadow of death;
<span class="verse" id="JB10_22">22&#160;</span> A land of darkness, as darkness <span class='add'>itself; and</span> of the shadow of death, without any order, and <span class='add'>where</span> the light <span class='add'>is</span> as darkness.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_1">1&#160;</span> Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB11_2">2&#160;</span> Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a man full of talk be justified?
<span class="verse" id="JB11_3">3&#160;</span> Should thy <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?
<span class="verse" id="JB11_4">4&#160;</span> For thou hast said, My doctrine <span class='add'>is</span> pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.
<span class="verse" id="JB11_5">5&#160;</span> But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee;
<span class="verse" id="JB11_6">6&#160;</span> And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that <span class='add'>they are</span> double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee <span class='add'>less</span> than thine iniquity <span class='add'>deserveth</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_7">7&#160;</span> Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?
<span class="verse" id="JB11_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as high as heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know?
<span class="verse" id="JB11_9">9&#160;</span> The measure thereof <span class='add'>is</span> longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
<span class="verse" id="JB11_10">10&#160;</span> If he <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who can hinder him?
<span class="verse" id="JB11_11">11&#160;</span> For he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also; will he not then consider <span class='add'>it</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JB11_12">12&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vain man would be wise, though man be born <span class='add'>like</span> a wild ass’s colt.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_13">13&#160;</span> If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him;
<span class="verse" id="JB11_14">14&#160;</span> If iniquity <span class='add'>be</span> in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles.
<span class="verse" id="JB11_15">15&#160;</span> For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear:
<span class="verse" id="JB11_16">16&#160;</span> Because thou shalt forget <span class='add'>thy</span> misery, <span class='add'>and</span> remember <span class='add'>it</span> as waters <span class='add'>that</span> pass away:
<span class="verse" id="JB11_17">17&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>thine</span> age <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be clearer than the noonday; thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning.
<span class="verse" id="JB11_18">18&#160;</span> And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt dig <span class='add'>about thee, and</span> thou shalt take thy rest in safety.
<span class="verse" id="JB11_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make <span class='add'>thee</span> afraid; yea, many shall <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>make suit unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB11_20">20&#160;</span> But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they shall not escape, and <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>their hope <span class='add'>shall be as</span> <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the giving up of the ghost.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_1">1&#160;</span> And Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB12_2">2&#160;</span> No doubt but ye <span class='add'>are</span> the people, and wisdom shall die with you.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_3">3&#160;</span> But I have <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understanding as well as you; <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> not inferior to you: yea, <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who knoweth not such things as these?
<span class="verse" id="JB12_4">4&#160;</span>I am <span class='add'>as</span> one mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him: the just upright <span class='add'>man is</span> laughed to scorn.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_5">5&#160;</span> He that is ready to slip with <span class='add'>his</span> feet <span class='add'>is as</span> a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_6">6&#160;</span> The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth <span class='add'>abundantly</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_7">7&#160;</span> But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee:
<span class="verse" id="JB12_8">8&#160;</span> Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_9">9&#160;</span> Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath wrought this?
<span class="verse" id="JB12_10">10&#160;</span> In whose hand <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>soul of every living thing, and the breath of <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all mankind.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Doth not the ear try words? and the <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mouth taste his meat?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_12">12&#160;</span> With the ancient <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom; and in length of days understanding.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>With him <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and understanding.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shutteth <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>up a man, and there can be no opening.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_15">15&#160;</span> Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_16">16&#160;</span>With him <span class='add'>is</span> strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver <span class='add'>are</span> his.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_17">17&#160;</span> He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, and maketh the judges fools.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_18">18&#160;</span> He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_19">19&#160;</span> He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He removeth away <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_21">21&#160;</span> He poureth contempt upon princes, and <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>weakeneth the strength of the mighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_22">22&#160;</span> He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to light the shadow of death.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_23">23&#160;</span> He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the nations, and <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>straiteneth them <span class='add'>again</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_24">24&#160;</span> He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness <span class='add'>where there is</span> no way.
<span class="verse" id="JB12_25">25&#160;</span> They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stagger like <span class='add'>a</span> drunken <span class='add'>man</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_1">1&#160;</span> Lo, mine eye hath seen all <span class='add'>this</span>, mine ear hath heard and understood it.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_2">2&#160;</span> What ye know, <span class='add'>the same</span> do I know also: I <span class='add'>am</span> not inferior unto you.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_3">3&#160;</span> Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_4">4&#160;</span> But ye <span class='add'>are</span> forgers of lies, ye <span class='add'>are</span> all physicians of no value.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_5">5&#160;</span> O that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_6">6&#160;</span> Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_7">7&#160;</span> Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_8">8&#160;</span> Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_9">9&#160;</span> Is it good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye <span class='add'>so</span> mock him?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_10">10&#160;</span> He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly accept persons.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_11">11&#160;</span> Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall upon you?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_12">12&#160;</span> Your remembrances <span class='add'>are</span> like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what <span class='add'>will</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_14">14&#160;</span> Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in mine hand?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_15">15&#160;</span> Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>maintain mine own ways before him.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_16">16&#160;</span>He also <span class='add'>shall be</span> my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come before him.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_17">17&#160;</span> Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_18">18&#160;</span> Behold now, I have ordered <span class='add'>my</span> cause; I know that I shall be justified.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_19">19&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> he <span class='add'>that</span> will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I shall give up the ghost.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_20">20&#160;</span> Only do not two <span class='add'>things</span> unto me: then will I not hide myself from thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_21">21&#160;</span> Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me afraid.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_22">22&#160;</span> Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer thou me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_23">23&#160;</span>How many <span class='add'>are</span> mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgression and my sin.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_24">24&#160;</span> Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_25">25&#160;</span> Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stubble?
<span class="verse" id="JB13_26">26&#160;</span> For thou writest bitter things against me, and <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_27">27&#160;</span> Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lookest narrowly unto all my paths; thou settest a print upon the <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heels of my feet.
<span class="verse" id="JB13_28">28&#160;</span> And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth eaten.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_1">1&#160;</span> Man <span class='add'>that is</span> born of a woman <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of few days, and full of trouble.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as a shadow, and continueth not.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_3">3&#160;</span> And dost thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me into judgment with thee?
<span class="verse" id="JB14_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Who <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>can bring a clean <span class='add'>thing</span> out of an unclean? not one.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Seeing his days <span class='add'>are</span> determined, the number of his months <span class='add'>are</span> with thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass;
<span class="verse" id="JB14_6">6&#160;</span> Turn from him, that he may <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling, his day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_7">7&#160;</span> For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_8">8&#160;</span> Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground;
<span class="verse" id="JB14_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> through the scent of water it will bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_10">10&#160;</span> But man dieth, and <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where <span class='add'>is</span> he?
<span class="verse" id="JB14_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the waters fail from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up:
<span class="verse" id="JB14_12">12&#160;</span> So man lieth down, and riseth not: till the heavens <span class='add'>be</span> no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_13">13&#160;</span> O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me a set time, and remember me!
<span class="verse" id="JB14_14">14&#160;</span> If a man die, shall he live <span class='add'>again</span>? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_15">15&#160;</span> Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my sin?
<span class="verse" id="JB14_17">17&#160;</span> My transgression <span class='add'>is</span> sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_18">18&#160;</span> And surely the mountain falling <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cometh to nought, and the rock is removed out of his place.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_19">19&#160;</span> The waters wear the stones: thou <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>washest away the things which grow <span class='add'>out</span> of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of man.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_20">20&#160;</span> Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_21">21&#160;</span> His sons come to honour, and he knoweth <span class='add'>it</span> not; and they are brought low, but he perceiveth <span class='add'>it</span> not of them.
<span class="verse" id="JB14_22">22&#160;</span> But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_1">1&#160;</span> Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB15_2">2&#160;</span> Should a wise man utter <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_3">3&#160;</span> Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he can do no good?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_4">4&#160;</span> Yea, <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thou castest off fear, and restrainest <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>prayer before God.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_5">5&#160;</span> For thy mouth <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the tongue of the crafty.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_6">6&#160;</span> Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Art</span> thou the first man <span class='add'>that</span> was born? or wast thou made before the hills?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_9">9&#160;</span> What knowest thou, that we know not? <span class='add'>what</span> understandest thou, which <span class='add'>is</span> not in us?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_10">10&#160;</span>With us <span class='add'>are</span> both the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than thy father.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Are</span> the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret thing with thee?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_12">12&#160;</span> Why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what do thy eyes wink at,
<span class="verse" id="JB15_13">13&#160;</span> That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and lettest <span class='add'>such</span> words go out of thy mouth?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>What <span class='add'>is</span> man, that he should be clean? and <span class='add'>he which is</span> born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
<span class="verse" id="JB15_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_16">16&#160;</span> How much more abominable and filthy <span class='add'>is</span> man, which drinketh iniquity like water? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_17">17&#160;</span> I will shew thee, hear me; and that <span class='add'>which</span> I have seen I will declare;
<span class="verse" id="JB15_18">18&#160;</span> Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid <span class='add'>it:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_19">19&#160;</span> Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger passed among them.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_20">20&#160;</span> The wicked man travaileth with pain all <span class='add'>his</span> days, and the number of years is hidden to the oppressor.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> A dreadful sound <span class='add'>is</span> in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_22">22&#160;</span> He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is waited for of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_23">23&#160;</span> He wandereth abroad for bread, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Where <span class='add'>is it</span>? he knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_24">24&#160;</span> Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_25">25&#160;</span> For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth himself against the Almighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_26">26&#160;</span> He runneth upon him, <span class='add'>even</span> on <span class='add'>his</span> neck, upon the thick bosses of his bucklers:
<span class="verse" id="JB15_27">27&#160;</span> Because he covereth his face with his fatness, and maketh collops of fat on <span class='add'>his</span> flanks.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_28">28&#160;</span> And he dwelleth in desolate cities, <span class='add'>and</span> in houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_29">29&#160;</span> He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_30">30&#160;</span> He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_31">31&#160;</span> Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall be his recompence.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_32">32&#160;</span> It shall be <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be green.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_33">33&#160;</span> He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_34">34&#160;</span> For the congregation of hypocrites <span class='add'>shall be</span> desolate, and fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery.
<span class="verse" id="JB15_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> They conceive mischief, and bring forth <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>vanity, and their belly prepareth deceit.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_1">1&#160;</span> Then Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB16_2">2&#160;</span> I have heard many such things: <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>miserable comforters <span class='add'>are</span> ye all.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_3">3&#160;</span> Shall <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou answerest?
<span class="verse" id="JB16_4">4&#160;</span> I also could speak as ye <span class='add'>do:</span> if your soul were in my soul’s stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should asswage <span class='add'>your grief</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_6">6&#160;</span> Though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and <span class='add'>though</span> I forbear, <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>what am I eased?
<span class="verse" id="JB16_7">7&#160;</span> But now he hath made me weary: thou hast made desolate all my company.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_8">8&#160;</span> And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, <span class='add'>which</span> is a witness <span class='add'>against me:</span> and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_9">9&#160;</span> He teareth <span class='add'>me</span> in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me with his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_10">10&#160;</span> They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully; they have gathered themselves together against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_11">11&#160;</span> God <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_12">12&#160;</span> I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken <span class='add'>me</span> by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_13">13&#160;</span> His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_14">14&#160;</span> He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like a giant.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_15">15&#160;</span> I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_16">16&#160;</span> My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids <span class='add'>is</span> the shadow of death; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_17">17&#160;</span>Not for <span class='add'>any</span> injustice in mine hands: also my prayer <span class='add'>is</span> pure.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_18">18&#160;</span> O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_19">19&#160;</span> Also now, behold, my witness <span class='add'>is</span> in heaven, and my record <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>on high.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_20">20&#160;</span> My friends <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>scorn me: <span class='add'>but</span> mine eye poureth out <span class='add'>tears</span> unto God.
<span class="verse" id="JB16_21">21&#160;</span> O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man <span class='add'>pleadeth</span> for his <a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>neighbour!
<span class="verse" id="JB16_22">22&#160;</span> When <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a few years are come, then I shall go the way <span class='add'>whence</span> I shall not return.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_1">1&#160;</span> My <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves <span class='add'>are ready</span> for me.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Are there</span> not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continue in their provocation?
<span class="verse" id="JB17_3">3&#160;</span> Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee; who <span class='add'>is</span> he <span class='add'>that</span> will strike hands with me?
<span class="verse" id="JB17_4">4&#160;</span> For thou hast hid their heart from understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_5">5&#160;</span> He that speaketh flattery to <span class='add'>his</span> friends, even the eyes of his children shall fail.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_6">6&#160;</span> He hath made me also a byword of the people; and <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>aforetime I was as a tabret.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_7">7&#160;</span> Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>my members <span class='add'>are</span> as a shadow.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_8">8&#160;</span> Upright <span class='add'>men</span> shall be astonied at this, and the innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_9">9&#160;</span> The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be stronger and stronger.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_10">10&#160;</span> But as for you all, do ye return, and come now: for I cannot find <span class='add'>one</span> wise <span class='add'>man</span> among you.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_11">11&#160;</span> My days are past, my purposes are broken off, <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the thoughts of my heart.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_12">12&#160;</span> They change the night into day: the light <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>short because of darkness.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_13">13&#160;</span> If I wait, the grave <span class='add'>is</span> mine house: I have made my bed in the darkness.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_14">14&#160;</span> I have <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>said to corruption, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my father: to the worm, <span class='add'>Thou art</span> my mother, and my sister.
<span class="verse" id="JB17_15">15&#160;</span>And where <span class='add'>is</span> now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it?
<span class="verse" id="JB17_16">16&#160;</span> They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when <span class='add'>our</span> rest together <span class='add'>is</span> in the dust.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_1">1&#160;</span> Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB18_2">2&#160;</span> How long <span class='add'>will it be ere</span> ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we will speak.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_3">3&#160;</span> Wherefore are we counted as beasts, <span class='add'>and</span> reputed vile in your sight?
<span class="verse" id="JB18_4">4&#160;</span> He teareth <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>himself in his anger: shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_5">5&#160;</span> Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_6">6&#160;</span> The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>candle shall be put out with him.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_7">7&#160;</span> The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_8">8&#160;</span> For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walketh upon a snare.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_9">9&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>gin shall take <span class='add'>him</span> by the heel, <span class='add'>and</span> the robber shall prevail against him.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_10">10&#160;</span> The snare <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_11">11&#160;</span> Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>drive him to his feet.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_12">12&#160;</span> His strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruction <span class='add'>shall be</span> ready at his side.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_13">13&#160;</span> It shall devour the <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>strength of his skin: <span class='add'>even</span> the firstborn of death shall devour his strength.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the king of terrors.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_15">15&#160;</span> It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because <span class='add'>it is</span> none of his: brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_16">16&#160;</span> His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in the street.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_19">19&#160;</span> He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dwellings.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_20">20&#160;</span> They that come after <span class='add'>him</span> shall be astonied at his day, as they that <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>went before <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were affrighted.
<span class="verse" id="JB18_21">21&#160;</span>Surely such <span class='add'>are</span> the dwellings of the wicked, and this <span class='add'>is</span> the place <span class='add'>of him that</span> knoweth not God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_1">1&#160;</span> Then Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB19_2">2&#160;</span> How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?
<span class="verse" id="JB19_3">3&#160;</span> These ten times have ye reproached me: ye are not ashamed <span class='add'>that</span> ye <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>make yourselves strange to me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_4">4&#160;</span> And be it indeed <span class='add'>that</span> I have erred, mine error remaineth with myself.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_5">5&#160;</span> If indeed ye will magnify <span class='add'>yourselves</span> against me, and plead against me my reproach:
<span class="verse" id="JB19_6">6&#160;</span> Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath compassed me with his net.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, I cry out of <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but <span class='add'>there is</span> no judgment.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_8">8&#160;</span> He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set darkness in my paths.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_9">9&#160;</span> He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown <span class='add'>from</span> my head.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_10">10&#160;</span> He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope hath he removed like a tree.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_11">11&#160;</span> He hath also kindled his wrath against me, and he counteth me unto him as <span class='add'>one of</span> his enemies.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_12">12&#160;</span> His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_13">13&#160;</span> He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_14">14&#160;</span> My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_15">15&#160;</span> They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a stranger: I am an alien in their sight.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_16">16&#160;</span> I called my servant, and he gave <span class='add'>me</span> no answer; I intreated him with my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_17">17&#160;</span> My breath is strange to my wife, though I intreated for the children’s <span class='add'>sake</span> of <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mine own body.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_18">18&#160;</span> Yea, <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>young children despised me; I arose, and they spake against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are turned against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_20">20&#160;</span> My bone cleaveth to my skin <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my teeth.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_21">21&#160;</span> Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_22">22&#160;</span> Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book!
<span class="verse" id="JB19_24">24&#160;</span> That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!
<span class="verse" id="JB19_25">25&#160;</span> For I know <span class='add'>that</span> my redeemer liveth, and <span class='add'>that</span> he shall stand at the latter <span class='add'>day</span> upon the earth:
<span class="verse" id="JB19_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>And <span class='add'>though</span> after my skin <span class='add'>worms</span> destroy this <span class='add'>body</span>, yet in my flesh shall I see God:
<span class="verse" id="JB19_27">27&#160;</span> Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not <a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>another; <span class='add'>though</span> my reins be consumed <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>within me.
<span class="verse" id="JB19_28">28&#160;</span> But ye should say, Why persecute we him, <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seeing the root of the matter is found in me?
<span class="verse" id="JB19_29">29&#160;</span> Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath <span class='add'>bringeth</span> the punishments of the sword, that ye may know <span class='add'>there is</span> a judgment.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_1">1&#160;</span> Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB20_2">2&#160;</span> Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for <span class='add'>this</span> <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I make haste.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_3">3&#160;</span> I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_4">4&#160;</span> Knowest thou <span class='add'>not</span> this of old, since man was placed upon earth,
<span class="verse" id="JB20_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> That the triumphing of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>short, and the joy of the hypocrite <span class='add'>but</span> for a moment?
<span class="verse" id="JB20_6">6&#160;</span> Though his excellency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>clouds;
<span class="verse" id="JB20_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> he shall perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say, Where <span class='add'>is</span> he?
<span class="verse" id="JB20_8">8&#160;</span> He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found: yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_9">9&#160;</span> The eye also <span class='add'>which</span> saw him shall <span class='add'>see him</span> no more; neither shall his place any more behold him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall restore their goods.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_11">11&#160;</span> His bones are full <span class='add'>of the sin</span> of his youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_12">12&#160;</span> Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, <span class='add'>though</span> he hide it under his tongue;
<span class="verse" id="JB20_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Though</span> he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>within his mouth:
<span class="verse" id="JB20_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> his meat in his bowels is turned, <span class='add'>it is</span> the gall of asps within him.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_15">15&#160;</span> He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his belly.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_16">16&#160;</span> He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper’s tongue shall slay him.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_17">17&#160;</span> He shall not see the rivers, <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the floods, the brooks of honey and butter.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_18">18&#160;</span> That which he laboured for shall he restore, and shall not swallow <span class='add'>it</span> down: <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>according to <span class='add'>his</span> substance <span class='add'>shall</span> the restitution <span class='add'>be</span>, and he shall not rejoice <span class='add'>therein</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_19">19&#160;</span> Because he hath <a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>oppressed <span class='add'>and</span> hath forsaken the poor; <span class='add'>because</span> he hath violently taken away an house which he builded not;
<span class="verse" id="JB20_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Surely he shall not <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that which he desired.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> There shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man look for his goods.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_22">22&#160;</span> In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: every hand of the <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wicked shall come upon him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>When</span> he is about to fill his belly, <span class='add'>God</span> shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain <span class='add'>it</span> upon him while he is eating.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_24">24&#160;</span> He shall flee from the iron weapon, <span class='add'>and</span> the bow of steel shall strike him through.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_25">25&#160;</span> It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>glittering sword cometh out of his gall: terrors <span class='add'>are</span> upon him.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_26">26&#160;</span> All darkness <span class='add'>shall be</span> hid in his secret places: a fire not blown shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_27">27&#160;</span> The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise up against him.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_28">28&#160;</span> The increase of his house shall depart, <span class='add'>and his goods</span> shall flow away in the day of his wrath.
<span class="verse" id="JB20_29">29&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>appointed unto him by God.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_1">1&#160;</span> But Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB21_2">2&#160;</span> Hear diligently my speech, and let this be your consolations.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_3">3&#160;</span> Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_4">4&#160;</span>As for me, <span class='add'>is</span> my complaint to man? and if <span class='add'>it were so</span>, why should not my spirit be <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>troubled?
<span class="verse" id="JB21_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Mark me, and be astonished, and lay <span class='add'>your</span> hand upon <span class='add'>your</span> mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_6">6&#160;</span> Even when I remember I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my flesh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power?
<span class="verse" id="JB21_8">8&#160;</span> Their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring before their eyes.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_9">9&#160;</span> Their houses <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>are</span> safe from fear, neither <span class='add'>is</span> the rod of God upon them.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_10">10&#160;</span> Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_11">11&#160;</span> They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_12">12&#160;</span> They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_13">13&#160;</span> They spend their days <a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_15">15&#160;</span>What <span class='add'>is</span> the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him?
<span class="verse" id="JB21_16">16&#160;</span> Lo, their good <span class='add'>is</span> not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_17">17&#160;</span> How oft is the <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>candle of the wicked put out! and <span class='add'>how oft</span> cometh their destruction upon them! <span class='add'>God</span> distributeth sorrows in his anger.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_18">18&#160;</span> They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>carrieth away.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_19">19&#160;</span> God layeth up <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him, and he shall know <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_20">20&#160;</span> His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_21">21&#160;</span> For what pleasure <span class='add'>hath</span> he in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut off in the midst?
<span class="verse" id="JB21_22">22&#160;</span>Shall <span class='add'>any</span> teach God knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that are high.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_23">23&#160;</span> One dieth <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_24">24&#160;</span> His <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_25">25&#160;</span> And another dieth in the bitterness of his soul, and never eateth with pleasure.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_26">26&#160;</span> They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_27">27&#160;</span> Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices <span class='add'>which</span> ye wrongfully imagine against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_28">28&#160;</span> For ye say, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the house of the prince? and where <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the dwelling places of the wicked?
<span class="verse" id="JB21_29">29&#160;</span> Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their tokens,
<span class="verse" id="JB21_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? they shall be brought forth to <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the day of wrath.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_31">31&#160;</span> Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him <span class='add'>what</span> he hath done?
<span class="verse" id="JB21_32">32&#160;</span> Yet shall he be brought to the <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grave, and shall <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>remain in the tomb.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_33">33&#160;</span> The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man shall draw after him, as <span class='add'>there are</span> innumerable before him.
<span class="verse" id="JB21_34">34&#160;</span> How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remaineth <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>falsehood?</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_1">1&#160;</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB22_2">2&#160;</span> Can a man be profitable unto God, <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself?
<span class="verse" id="JB22_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it</span> any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or <span class='add'>is it</span> gain <span class='add'>to him</span>, that thou makest thy ways perfect?
<span class="verse" id="JB22_4">4&#160;</span> Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he enter with thee into judgment? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not thy wickedness great? and thine iniquities infinite?
<span class="verse" id="JB22_6">6&#160;</span> For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother for nought, and <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stripped the naked of their clothing.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_7">7&#160;</span> Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast withholden bread from the hungry.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_8">8&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for</span> <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the mighty man, he had the earth; and the <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>honourable man dwelt in it.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_9">9&#160;</span> Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore snares <span class='add'>are</span> round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth thee;
<span class="verse" id="JB22_11">11&#160;</span> Or darkness, <span class='add'>that</span> thou canst not see; and abundance of waters cover thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not God in the height of heaven? and behold <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the height of the stars, how high they are!
<span class="verse" id="JB22_13">13&#160;</span> And thou sayest, <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>How doth God know? can he judge through the dark cloud?
<span class="verse" id="JB22_14">14&#160;</span> Thick clouds <span class='add'>are</span> a covering to him, that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_15">15&#160;</span> Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden?
<span class="verse" id="JB22_16">16&#160;</span> Which were cut down out of time, <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whose foundation was overflown with a flood:
<span class="verse" id="JB22_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can the Almighty do <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for them?
<span class="verse" id="JB22_18">18&#160;</span> Yet he filled their houses with good <span class='add'>things:</span> but <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The righteous see <span class='add'>it</span>, and are glad: and the innocent laugh them to scorn.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_20">20&#160;</span> Whereas our <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>substance is not cut down, but <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the remnant of them the fire consumeth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_21">21&#160;</span> Acquaint now thyself <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_22">22&#160;</span> Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_24">24&#160;</span> Then shalt thou lay up gold <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as dust, and the <span class='add'>gold</span> of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_25">25&#160;</span> Yea, the Almighty shall be thy <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>defence, and thou shalt have <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>plenty of silver.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_26">26&#160;</span> For then shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto God.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_27">27&#160;</span> Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_28">28&#160;</span> Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_29">29&#160;</span>When <span class='add'>men</span> are cast down, then thou shalt say, <span class='add'>There is</span> lifting up; and he shall save <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the humble person.
<span class="verse" id="JB22_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered by the pureness of thine hands.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_1">1&#160;</span> Then Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB23_2">2&#160;</span> Even to day <span class='add'>is</span> my complaint bitter: <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my stroke is heavier than my groaning.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_3">3&#160;</span> Oh that I knew where I might find him! <span class='add'>that</span> I might come <span class='add'>even</span> to his seat!
<span class="verse" id="JB23_4">4&#160;</span> I would order <span class='add'>my</span> cause before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_5">5&#160;</span> I would know the words <span class='add'>which</span> he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_6">6&#160;</span> Will he plead against me with <span class='add'>his</span> great power? No; but he would put <span class='add'>strength</span> in me.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_7">7&#160;</span> There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for ever from my judge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, I go forward, but he <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>there;</span> and backward, but I cannot perceive him:
<span class="verse" id="JB23_9">9&#160;</span> On the left hand, where he doth work, but I cannot behold <span class='add'>him:</span> he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see <span class='add'>him:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_10">10&#160;</span> But he knoweth <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the way that I take: <span class='add'>when</span> he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_11">11&#160;</span> My foot hath held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_12">12&#160;</span> Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips; <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>my necessary <span class='add'>food</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_13">13&#160;</span>But he <span class='add'>is</span> in one <span class='add'>mind</span>, and who can turn him? and <span class='add'>what</span> <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his soul desireth, even <span class='add'>that</span> he doeth.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_14">14&#160;</span> For he performeth <span class='add'>the thing that is</span> appointed for me: and many such <span class='add'>things are</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him.
<span class="verse" id="JB23_16">16&#160;</span> For God maketh my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me:
<span class="verse" id="JB23_17">17&#160;</span> Because I was not cut off before the darkness, <span class='add'>neither</span> hath he covered the darkness from my face.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_1">1&#160;</span> Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him not see his days?
<span class="verse" id="JB24_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Some</span> remove the <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>feed <span class='add'>thereof</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_3">3&#160;</span> They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow’s ox for a pledge.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_4">4&#160;</span> They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide themselves together.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>as</span> wild asses in the desert, go they forth to their work; rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness <span class='add'>yieldeth</span> food for them <span class='add'>and</span> for <span class='add'>their</span> children.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_6">6&#160;</span> They reap <span class='add'>every one</span> his <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>corn in the field: and <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they gather the vintage of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_7">7&#160;</span> They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that <span class='add'>they have</span> no covering in the cold.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_8">8&#160;</span> They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_9">9&#160;</span> They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_10">10&#160;</span>They cause <span class='add'>him</span> to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf <span class='add'>from</span> the hungry;
<span class="verse" id="JB24_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Which</span> make oil within their walls, <span class='add'>and</span> tread <span class='add'>their</span> winepresses, and suffer thirst.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_12">12&#160;</span> Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded crieth out: yet God layeth not folly <span class='add'>to them</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_13">13&#160;</span> They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_14">14&#160;</span> The murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy, and in the night is as a thief.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_15">15&#160;</span> The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me: and <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>disguiseth <span class='add'>his</span> face.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_16">16&#160;</span> In the dark they dig through houses, <span class='add'>which</span> they had marked for themselves in the daytime: they know not the light.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_17">17&#160;</span> For the morning <span class='add'>is</span> to them even as the shadow of death: if <span class='add'>one</span> know <span class='add'>them, they are in</span> the terrors of the shadow of death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_18">18&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is</span> swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth: he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_19">19&#160;</span> Drought and heat <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consume the snow waters: <span class='add'>so doth</span> the grave <span class='add'>those which</span> have sinned.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_20">20&#160;</span> The womb shall forget him; the worm shall feed sweetly on him; he shall be no more remembered; and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_21">21&#160;</span> He evil entreateth the barren <span class='add'>that</span> beareth not: and doeth not good to the widow.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_22">22&#160;</span> He draweth also the mighty with his power: he riseth up, <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and no <span class='add'>man</span> is sure of life.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Though</span> it be given him <span class='add'>to be</span> in safety, whereon he resteth; yet his eyes <span class='add'>are</span> upon their ways.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_24">24&#160;</span> They are exalted for a little while, but <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are gone and brought low; they are <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taken out of the way as all <span class='add'>other</span>, and cut off as the tops of the ears of corn.
<span class="verse" id="JB24_25">25&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> not <span class='add'>so</span> now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_1">1&#160;</span> Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB25_2">2&#160;</span> Dominion and fear <span class='add'>are</span> with him, he maketh peace in his high places.
<span class="verse" id="JB25_3">3&#160;</span> Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his light arise?
<span class="verse" id="JB25_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean <span class='add'>that is</span> born of a woman?
<span class="verse" id="JB25_5">5&#160;</span> Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight.
<span class="verse" id="JB25_6">6&#160;</span> How much less man, <span class='add'>that is</span> <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a worm? and the son of man, <span class='add'>which is</span> a worm?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_1">1&#160;</span> But Job answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB26_2">2&#160;</span> How hast thou helped <span class='add'>him that is</span> without power? <span class='add'>how</span> savest thou the arm <span class='add'>that hath</span> no strength?
<span class="verse" id="JB26_3">3&#160;</span> How hast thou counselled <span class='add'>him that hath</span> no wisdom? and <span class='add'>how</span> hast thou plentifully declared the thing as it is?
<span class="verse" id="JB26_4">4&#160;</span> To whom hast thou uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_5">5&#160;</span> Dead <span class='add'>things</span> are formed from under the waters, <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the inhabitants thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hell <span class='add'>is</span> naked before him, and destruction hath no covering.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_7">7&#160;</span> He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, <span class='add'>and</span> hangeth the earth upon nothing.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_8">8&#160;</span> He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_9">9&#160;</span> He holdeth back the face of his throne, <span class='add'>and</span> spreadeth his cloud upon it.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_10">10&#160;</span> He hath compassed the waters with bounds, <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>until the day and night come to an end.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_11">11&#160;</span> The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_12">12&#160;</span> He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the proud.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_13">13&#160;</span> By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed the crooked serpent.
<span class="verse" id="JB26_14">14&#160;</span>Lo, these <span class='add'>are</span> parts of his ways: but how little a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover Job <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continued his parable, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB27_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> God liveth, <span class='add'>who</span> hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, <span class='add'>who</span> hath <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vexed my soul;
<span class="verse" id="JB27_3">3&#160;</span> All the while my breath <span class='add'>is</span> in me, and <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the spirit of God <span class='add'>is</span> in my nostrils;
<span class="verse" id="JB27_4">4&#160;</span> My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_5">5&#160;</span> God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_6">6&#160;</span> My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach <span class='add'>me</span> <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>so long as I live.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_7">7&#160;</span> Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me as the unrighteous.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For what <span class='add'>is</span> the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul?
<span class="verse" id="JB27_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Will God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him?
<span class="verse" id="JB27_10">10&#160;</span> Will he delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call upon God? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_11">11&#160;</span> I will teach you <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by the hand of God: <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> with the Almighty will I not conceal.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_12">12&#160;</span> Behold, all ye yourselves have seen <span class='add'>it;</span> why then are ye thus altogether vain?
<span class="verse" id="JB27_13">13&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, <span class='add'>which</span> they shall receive of the Almighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_14">14&#160;</span> If his children be multiplied, <span class='add'>it is</span> for the sword: and his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_15">15&#160;</span> Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his widows shall not weep.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_16">16&#160;</span> Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay;
<span class="verse" id="JB27_17">17&#160;</span> He may prepare <span class='add'>it</span>, but the just shall put <span class='add'>it</span> on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_18">18&#160;</span> He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth <span class='add'>that</span> the keeper maketh.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_19">19&#160;</span> The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he openeth his eyes, and he <span class='add'>is</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away in the night.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_21">21&#160;</span> The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_22">22&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>God</span> shall cast upon him, and not spare: <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he would fain flee out of his hand.
<span class="verse" id="JB27_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Men</span> shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_1">1&#160;</span> Surely there is <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a vein for the silver, and a place for gold <span class='add'>where</span> they fine <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_2">2&#160;</span> Iron is taken out of the <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>earth, and brass <span class='add'>is</span> molten <span class='add'>out of</span> the stone.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_3">3&#160;</span> He setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection: the stones of darkness, and the shadow of death.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_4">4&#160;</span> The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; <span class='add'>even the waters</span> forgotten of the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned up as it were fire.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_6">6&#160;</span> The stones of it <span class='add'>are</span> the place of sapphires: and it hath <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dust of gold.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture’s eye hath not seen:
<span class="verse" id="JB28_8">8&#160;</span> The lion’s whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_9">9&#160;</span> He putteth forth his hand upon the <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rock; he overturneth the mountains by the roots.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_10">10&#160;</span> He cutteth out rivers among the rocks; and his eye seeth every precious thing.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_11">11&#160;</span> He bindeth the floods <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from overflowing; and <span class='add'>the thing that is</span> hid bringeth he forth to light.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_12">12&#160;</span> But where shall wisdom be found? and where <span class='add'>is</span> the place of understanding?
<span class="verse" id="JB28_13">13&#160;</span> Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land of the living. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The depth saith, It <span class='add'>is</span> not in me: and the sea saith, <span class='add'>It is</span> not with me.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> It <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed <span class='add'>for</span> the price thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_16">16&#160;</span> It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_17">17&#160;</span> The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it <span class='add'>shall not be for</span> <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>jewels of fine gold.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_18">18&#160;</span> No mention shall be made of <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> above rubies.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_19">19&#160;</span> The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whence then cometh wisdom? and where <span class='add'>is</span> the place of understanding?
<span class="verse" id="JB28_21">21&#160;</span> Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of the <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>air.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_22">22&#160;</span> Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_23">23&#160;</span> God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_24">24&#160;</span> For he looketh to the ends of the earth, <span class='add'>and</span> seeth under the whole heaven;
<span class="verse" id="JB28_25">25&#160;</span> To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth the waters by measure.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_26">26&#160;</span> When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder:
<span class="verse" id="JB28_27">27&#160;</span> Then did he see it, and <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>declare it; he prepared it, yea, and searched it out.
<span class="verse" id="JB28_28">28&#160;</span> And unto man he said, Behold, <a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the fear of the Lord, that <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom; and to depart from evil <span class='add'>is</span> understanding.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover Job <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>continued his parable, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB29_2">2&#160;</span> Oh that I were as <span class='add'>in</span> months past, as <span class='add'>in</span> the days <span class='add'>when</span> God preserved me;
<span class="verse" id="JB29_3">3&#160;</span> When his <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>candle shined upon my head, <span class='add'>and when</span> by his light I walked <span class='add'>through</span> darkness;
<span class="verse" id="JB29_4">4&#160;</span> As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God <span class='add'>was</span> upon my tabernacle;
<span class="verse" id="JB29_5">5&#160;</span> When the Almighty <span class='add'>was</span> yet with me, <span class='add'>when</span> my children <span class='add'>were</span> about me;
<span class="verse" id="JB29_6">6&#160;</span> When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>me out rivers of oil;</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_7">7&#160;</span> When I went out to the gate through the city, <span class='add'>when</span> I prepared my seat in the street!
<span class="verse" id="JB29_8">8&#160;</span> The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, <span class='add'>and</span> stood up.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_9">9&#160;</span> The princes refrained talking, and laid <span class='add'>their</span> hand on their mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the roof of their mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_11">11&#160;</span> When the ear heard <span class='add'>me</span>, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw <span class='add'>me</span>, it gave witness to me:
<span class="verse" id="JB29_12">12&#160;</span> Because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and <span class='add'>him that had</span> none to help him.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_13">13&#160;</span> The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_14">14&#160;</span> I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment <span class='add'>was</span> as a robe and a diadem.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_15">15&#160;</span> I was eyes to the blind, and feet <span class='add'>was</span> I to the lame.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_16">16&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>was</span> a father to the poor: and the cause <span class='add'>which</span> I knew not I searched out.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_17">17&#160;</span> And I brake <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the jaws of the wicked, and <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>plucked the spoil out of his teeth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_18">18&#160;</span> Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply <span class='add'>my</span> days as the sand.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_19">19&#160;</span> My root <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night upon my branch.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_20">20&#160;</span> My glory <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fresh in me, and my bow was <a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>renewed in my hand.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_21">21&#160;</span>Unto me <span class='add'>men</span> gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_22">22&#160;</span> After my words they spake not again; and my speech dropped upon them.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_23">23&#160;</span> And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their mouth wide <span class='add'>as</span> for the latter rain.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> I laughed on them, they believed <span class='add'>it</span> not; and the light of my countenance they cast not down.
<span class="verse" id="JB29_25">25&#160;</span> I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as one <span class='add'>that</span> comforteth the mourners.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_1">1&#160;</span>But now <span class='add'>they that are</span> <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_2">2&#160;</span> Yea, whereto <span class='add'>might</span> the strength of their hands <span class='add'>profit</span> me, in whom old age was perished?
<span class="verse" id="JB30_3">3&#160;</span> For want and famine <span class='add'>they were</span> <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>solitary; <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>fleeing into the wilderness <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in former time desolate and waste.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_4">4&#160;</span> Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots <span class='add'>for</span> their meat.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_5">5&#160;</span> They were driven forth from among <span class='add'>men</span>, (they cried after them as <span class='add'>after</span> a thief;)
<span class="verse" id="JB30_6">6&#160;</span> To dwell in the <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>clifts of the valleys, <span class='add'>in</span> <a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>caves of the earth, and <span class='add'>in</span> the rocks.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_7">7&#160;</span> Among the bushes they brayed; under the nettles they were gathered together.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They were</span> children of fools, yea, children of <a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>base men: they were viler than the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_10">10&#160;</span> They abhor me, they flee far from me, <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and spare not to spit in my face.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_11">11&#160;</span> Because he hath loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also let loose the bridle before me.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_12">12&#160;</span>Upon <span class='add'>my</span> right <span class='add'>hand</span> rise the youth; they push away my feet, and they raise up against me the ways of their destruction.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_13">13&#160;</span> They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_14">14&#160;</span> They came <span class='add'>upon me</span> as a wide breaking in <span class='add'>of waters:</span> in the desolation they rolled themselves <span class='add'>upon me</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_15">15&#160;</span> Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my soul as the wind: and my welfare passeth away as a cloud.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_16">16&#160;</span> And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_17">17&#160;</span> My bones are pierced in me in the night season: and my sinews take no rest.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_18">18&#160;</span> By the great force <span class='add'>of my disease</span> is my garment changed: it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_19">19&#160;</span> He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_20">20&#160;</span> I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me <span class='add'>not</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_21">21&#160;</span> Thou art <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>become cruel to me: with <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy strong hand thou opposest thyself against me.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_22">22&#160;</span> Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride <span class='add'>upon it</span>, and dissolvest my <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>substance.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_23">23&#160;</span> For I know <span class='add'>that</span> thou wilt bring me <span class='add'>to</span> death, and <span class='add'>to</span> the house appointed for all living.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_24">24&#160;</span> Howbeit he will not stretch out <span class='add'>his</span> hand to the <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>grave, though they cry in his destruction.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Did not I weep <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for him that was in trouble? was <span class='add'>not</span> my soul grieved for the poor?
<span class="verse" id="JB30_26">26&#160;</span> When I looked for good, then evil came <span class='add'>unto me:</span> and when I waited for light, there came darkness.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_27">27&#160;</span> My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction prevented me.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_28">28&#160;</span> I went mourning without the sun: I stood up, <span class='add'>and</span> I cried in the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>owls.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_30">30&#160;</span> My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat.
<span class="verse" id="JB30_31">31&#160;</span> My harp also is <span class='add'>turned</span> to mourning, and my organ into the voice of them that weep.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_1">1&#160;</span> I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?
<span class="verse" id="JB31_2">2&#160;</span> For what portion of God <span class='add'>is there</span> from above? and <span class='add'>what</span> inheritance of the Almighty from on high?
<span class="verse" id="JB31_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not destruction to the wicked? and a strange <span class='add'>punishment</span> to the workers of iniquity?
<span class="verse" id="JB31_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps?
<span class="verse" id="JB31_5">5&#160;</span> If I have walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_7">7&#160;</span> If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_9">9&#160;</span> If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or <span class='add'>if</span> I have laid wait at my neighbour’s door;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_11">11&#160;</span>For this <span class='add'>is</span> an heinous crime; yea, it <span class='add'>is</span> an iniquity <span class='add'>to be punished by</span> the judges.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_12">12&#160;</span>For it <span class='add'>is</span> a fire <span class='add'>that</span> consumeth to destruction, and would root out all mine increase.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_13">13&#160;</span> If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant, when they contended with me;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_14">14&#160;</span> What then shall I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him?
<span class="verse" id="JB31_15">15&#160;</span> Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>did not one fashion us in the womb?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_16">16&#160;</span> If I have withheld the poor from <span class='add'>their</span> desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_17">17&#160;</span> Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten thereof;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_18">18&#160;</span>(For from my youth he was brought up with me, as <span class='add'>with</span> a father, and I have guided <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>her from my mother’s womb;)
<span class="verse" id="JB31_19">19&#160;</span> If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_20">20&#160;</span> If his loins have not blessed me, and <span class='add'>if</span> he were <span class='add'>not</span> warmed with the fleece of my sheep;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_21">21&#160;</span> If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate:
<span class="verse" id="JB31_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from <a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the bone.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_23">23&#160;</span> For destruction <span class='add'>from</span> God <span class='add'>was</span> a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_24">24&#160;</span> If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, <span class='add'>Thou art</span> my confidence;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_25">25&#160;</span> If I rejoiced because my wealth <span class='add'>was</span> great, and because mine hand had <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gotten much;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_26">26&#160;</span> If I beheld <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the sun when it shined, or the moon walking <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='add'>in</span> brightness;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_27">27&#160;</span> And my heart hath been secretly enticed, or <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my mouth hath kissed my hand:
<span class="verse" id="JB31_28">28&#160;</span>This also <span class='add'>were</span> an iniquity <span class='add'>to be punished by</span> the judge: for I should have denied the God <span class='add'>that is</span> above.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_29">29&#160;</span> If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found him:
<span class="verse" id="JB31_30">30&#160;</span> Neither have I suffered <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his soul.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_31">31&#160;</span> If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we cannot be satisfied.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_32">32&#160;</span> The stranger did not lodge in the street: <span class='add'>but</span> I opened my doors <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to the traveller.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_33">33&#160;</span> If I covered my transgressions <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom:
<span class="verse" id="JB31_34">34&#160;</span> Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me, that I kept silence, <span class='add'>and</span> went not out of the door?
<span class="verse" id="JB31_35">35&#160;</span> Oh that one would hear me! <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>behold, my desire <span class='add'>is, that</span> the Almighty would answer me, and <span class='add'>that</span> mine adversary had written a book.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_36">36&#160;</span> Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, <span class='add'>and</span> bind it <span class='add'>as</span> a crown to me.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_37">37&#160;</span> I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince would I go near unto him.
<span class="verse" id="JB31_38">38&#160;</span> If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>complain;
<span class="verse" id="JB31_39">39&#160;</span> If I have eaten <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the fruits thereof without money, or have <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>caused the owners thereof to lose their life:
<span class="verse" id="JB31_40">40&#160;</span> Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_1">1&#160;</span> So these three men ceased <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to answer Job, because he <span class='add'>was</span> righteous in his own eyes.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_2">2&#160;</span> Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>himself rather than God.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_3">3&#160;</span> Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and <span class='add'>yet</span> had condemned Job.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_4">4&#160;</span> Now Elihu had <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>waited till Job had spoken, because they <span class='add'>were</span> <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>elder than he.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_5">5&#160;</span> When Elihu saw that <span class='add'>there was</span> no answer in the mouth of <span class='add'>these</span> three men, then his wrath was kindled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_6">6&#160;</span> And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I <span class='add'>am</span> <a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>young, and ye <span class='add'>are</span> very old; wherefore I was afraid, and <a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>durst not shew you mine opinion.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_7">7&#160;</span> I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_8">8&#160;</span> But <span class='add'>there is</span> a spirit in man: and <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_9">9&#160;</span> Great men are not <span class='add'>always</span> wise: neither do the aged understand judgment.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also will shew mine opinion.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>reasons, whilst ye searched out <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>what to say.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_12">12&#160;</span> Yea, I attended unto you, and, behold, <span class='add'>there was</span> none of you that convinced Job, <span class='add'>or</span> that answered his words:
<span class="verse" id="JB32_13">13&#160;</span> Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_14">14&#160;</span> Now he hath not <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>directed <span class='add'>his</span> words against me: neither will I answer him with your speeches.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_15">15&#160;</span> They were amazed, they answered no more: <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they left off speaking.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_16">16&#160;</span> When I had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, <span class='add'>and</span> answered no more;)
<span class="verse" id="JB32_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>I said</span>, I will answer also my part, I also will shew mine opinion.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_18">18&#160;</span> For I am full of <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>matter, <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the spirit within me constraineth me.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_19">19&#160;</span> Behold, my belly <span class='add'>is</span> as wine <span class='add'>which</span> <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hath no vent; it is ready to burst like new bottles.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_20">20&#160;</span> I will speak, <a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and answer.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_21">21&#160;</span> Let me not, I pray you, accept any man’s person, neither let me give flattering titles unto man.
<span class="verse" id="JB32_22">22&#160;</span> For I know not to give flattering titles; <span class='add'>in so doing</span> my maker would soon take me away.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_1">1&#160;</span> Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all my words.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_2">2&#160;</span> Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_3">3&#160;</span> My words <span class='add'>shall be of</span> the uprightness of my heart: and my lips shall utter knowledge clearly.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_4">4&#160;</span> The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_5">5&#160;</span> If thou canst answer me, set <span class='add'>thy words</span> in order before me, stand up.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>according to thy wish in God’s stead: I also am <a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>formed out of the clay.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my hand be heavy upon thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_8">8&#160;</span> Surely thou hast spoken <a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice of <span class='add'>thy</span> words, <span class='add'>saying</span>,
<span class="verse" id="JB33_9">9&#160;</span> I am clean without transgression, I <span class='add'>am</span> innocent; neither <span class='add'>is there</span> iniquity in me.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_10">10&#160;</span> Behold, he findeth occasions against me, he counteth me for his enemy,
<span class="verse" id="JB33_11">11&#160;</span> He putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my paths.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_12">12&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>in</span> this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God is greater than man.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_13">13&#160;</span> Why dost thou strive against him? for <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he giveth not account of any of his matters.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_14">14&#160;</span> For God speaketh once, yea twice, <span class='add'>yet man</span> perceiveth it not.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_15">15&#160;</span> In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed;
<span class="verse" id="JB33_16">16&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction,
<span class="verse" id="JB33_17">17&#160;</span> That he may withdraw man <span class='add'>from his</span> <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>purpose, and hide pride from man.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_18">18&#160;</span> He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from perishing by the sword.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_19">19&#160;</span> He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong <span class='add'>pain:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> So that his life abhorreth bread, and his soul <a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dainty meat.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_21">21&#160;</span> His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his bones <span class='add'>that</span> were not seen stick out.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_23">23&#160;</span> If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness:
<span class="verse" id="JB33_24">24&#160;</span> Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found <a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a ransom.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_25">25&#160;</span> His flesh shall be fresher <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>than a child’s: he shall return to the days of his youth:
<span class="verse" id="JB33_26">26&#160;</span> He shall pray unto God, and he will be favourable unto him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will render unto man his righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He looketh upon men, and <span class='add'>if any</span> say, I have sinned, and perverted <span class='add'>that which was</span> right, and it profited me not;
<span class="verse" id="JB33_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_29">29&#160;</span>Lo, all these <span class='add'>things</span> worketh God <a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>oftentimes with man,
<span class="verse" id="JB33_30">30&#160;</span> To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_31">31&#160;</span> Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I will speak.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_32">32&#160;</span> If thou hast any thing to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to justify thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB33_33">33&#160;</span> If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_1">1&#160;</span> Furthermore Elihu answered and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB34_2">2&#160;</span> Hear my words, O ye wise <span class='add'>men;</span> and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the ear trieth words, as the <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mouth tasteth meat.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_4">4&#160;</span> Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what <span class='add'>is</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_5">5&#160;</span> For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my judgment.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_6">6&#160;</span> Should I lie against my right? <a href='#FN408' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>my wound <span class='add'>is</span> incurable without transgression.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_7">7&#160;</span> What man <span class='add'>is</span> like Job, <span class='add'>who</span> drinketh up scorning like water?
<span class="verse" id="JB34_8">8&#160;</span> Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with wicked men.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_9">9&#160;</span> For he hath said, It profiteth a man nothing that he should delight himself with God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore hearken unto me, ye <a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>men of understanding: <a href='#FN410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>far be it from God, <span class='add'>that he should do</span> wickedness; and <span class='add'>from</span> the Almighty, <span class='add'>that he should commit</span> iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find according to <span class='add'>his</span> ways.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_12">12&#160;</span> Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_13">13&#160;</span> Who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed <a href='#FN412' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the whole world?
<span class="verse" id="JB34_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If he set his heart <a href='#FN414' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>upon man, <span class='add'>if</span> he gather unto himself his spirit and his breath;
<span class="verse" id="JB34_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN415' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto dust. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_16">16&#160;</span>If now <span class='add'>thou hast</span> understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of my words.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_17">17&#160;</span> Shall even he that hateth right <a href='#FN416' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>govern? and wilt thou condemn him that is most just?
<span class="verse" id="JB34_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it fit</span> to say to a king, <span class='add'>Thou art</span> wicked? <span class='add'>and</span> to princes, <span class='add'>Ye are</span> ungodly?
<span class="verse" id="JB34_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>How much less to him</span> that <a href='#FN417' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>accepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the poor? for they all <span class='add'>are</span> the work of his hands.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_20">20&#160;</span> In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at midnight, and pass away: and <a href='#FN418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the mighty shall be taken away without hand.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN419' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For his eyes <span class='add'>are</span> upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his goings.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_23">23&#160;</span> For he will not lay upon man more <span class='add'>than right;</span> that he should <a href='#FN420' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>enter into judgment with God.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_24">24&#160;</span> He shall break in pieces mighty men <a href='#FN421' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>without number, and set others in their stead.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth <span class='add'>them</span> in the night, so that they are <a href='#FN422' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_26">26&#160;</span> He striketh them as wicked men <a href='#FN423' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the open sight of others;
<span class="verse" id="JB34_27">27&#160;</span> Because they turned back <a href='#FN424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from him, and would not consider any of his ways:
<span class="verse" id="JB34_28">28&#160;</span> So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_29">29&#160;</span> When he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he hideth <span class='add'>his</span> face, who then can behold him? whether <span class='add'>it be done</span> against a nation, or against a man only:
<span class="verse" id="JB34_30">30&#160;</span> That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_31">31&#160;</span> Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne <span class='add'>chastisement</span>, I will not offend <span class='add'>any more:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That which</span> I see not teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN425' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='add'>Should it be</span> according to thy mind? he will recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not I: therefore speak what thou knowest.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_34">34&#160;</span> Let men <a href='#FN426' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken unto me.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_35">35&#160;</span> Job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words <span class='add'>were</span> without wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_36">36&#160;</span><a href='#FN427' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> My desire <span class='add'>is that</span> Job may be tried unto the end because of <span class='add'>his</span> answers for wicked men.
<span class="verse" id="JB34_37">37&#160;</span> For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth <span class='add'>his hands</span> among us, and multiplieth his words against God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_1">1&#160;</span> Elihu spake moreover, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB35_2">2&#160;</span> Thinkest thou this to be right, <span class='add'>that</span> thou saidst, My righteousness <span class='add'>is</span> more than God’s?
<span class="verse" id="JB35_3">3&#160;</span> For thou saidst, What advantage will it be unto thee? <span class='add'>and</span>, What profit shall I have, <a href='#FN428' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>if I be cleansed</span> from my sin?
<span class="verse" id="JB35_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB35_5">5&#160;</span> Look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the clouds <span class='add'>which</span> are higher than thou.
<span class="verse" id="JB35_6">6&#160;</span> If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or <span class='add'>if</span> thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?
<span class="verse" id="JB35_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN430' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine hand?
<span class="verse" id="JB35_8">8&#160;</span> Thy wickedness <span class='add'>may hurt</span> a man as thou <span class='add'>art;</span> and thy righteousness <span class='add'>may profit</span> the son of man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_9">9&#160;</span> By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make <span class='add'>the oppressed</span> to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty.
<span class="verse" id="JB35_10">10&#160;</span> But none saith, Where <span class='add'>is</span> God my maker, who giveth songs in the night;
<span class="verse" id="JB35_11">11&#160;</span> Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven?
<span class="verse" id="JB35_12">12&#160;</span> There they cry, but none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men.
<span class="verse" id="JB35_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN431' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_14">14&#160;</span> Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, <span class='add'>yet</span> judgment <span class='add'>is</span> before him; therefore trust thou in him.
<span class="verse" id="JB35_15">15&#160;</span>But now, because <span class='add'>it is</span> not <span class='add'>so</span>, <a href='#FN432' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he hath visited in his anger; yet <a href='#FN433' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he knoweth <span class='add'>it</span> not in great extremity:
<span class="verse" id="JB35_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_1">1&#160;</span> Elihu also proceeded, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB36_2">2&#160;</span> Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee <a href='#FN434' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that <span class='add'>I have</span> yet to speak on God’s behalf.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_3">3&#160;</span> I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_4">4&#160;</span> For truly my words <span class='add'>shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> false: he that is perfect in knowledge <span class='add'>is</span> with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_5">5&#160;</span> Behold, God <span class='add'>is</span> mighty, and despiseth not <span class='add'>any: he is</span> mighty in strength <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN435' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_6">6&#160;</span> He preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the <a href='#FN436' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>poor.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN437' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings <span class='add'>are they</span> on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are exalted.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_8">8&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>they be</span> bound in fetters, <span class='add'>and</span> be holden in cords of affliction;
<span class="verse" id="JB36_9">9&#160;</span> Then he sheweth them their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_10">10&#160;</span> He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_11">11&#160;</span> If they obey and serve <span class='add'>him</span>, they shall <a href='#FN438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_12">12&#160;</span> But if they obey not, <a href='#FN439' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_13">13&#160;</span> But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he bindeth them.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN440' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> They die in youth, and their life <span class='add'>is</span> among the <a href='#FN441' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>unclean.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_15">15&#160;</span> He delivereth the <a href='#FN442' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>poor in his affliction, and openeth their ears in oppression.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_16">16&#160;</span> Even so would he have removed thee out of the strait <span class='add'>into</span> a broad place, where <span class='add'>there is</span> no straitness; and <a href='#FN443' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that which should be set on thy table <span class='add'>should be</span> full of fatness.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_17">17&#160;</span> But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked: <a href='#FN444' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>judgment and justice take hold <span class='add'>on thee</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_18">18&#160;</span>Because <span class='add'>there is</span> wrath, <span class='add'>beware</span> lest he take thee away with <span class='add'>his</span> stroke: then a great ransom cannot <a href='#FN445' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deliver thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_19">19&#160;</span> Will he esteem thy riches? <span class='add'>no</span>, not gold, nor all the forces of strength.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_20">20&#160;</span> Desire not the night, when people are cut off in their place.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_21">21&#160;</span> Take heed, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather than affliction.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_22">22&#160;</span> Behold, God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him?
<span class="verse" id="JB36_23">23&#160;</span> Who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou hast wrought iniquity? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_24">24&#160;</span> Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_25">25&#160;</span> Every man may see it; man may behold <span class='add'>it</span> afar off.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_26">26&#160;</span> Behold, God <span class='add'>is</span> great, and we know <span class='add'>him</span> not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_27">27&#160;</span> For he maketh small the drops of water: they pour down rain according to the vapour thereof:
<span class="verse" id="JB36_28">28&#160;</span> Which the clouds do drop <span class='add'>and</span> distil upon man abundantly.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_29">29&#160;</span>Also can <span class='add'>any</span> understand the spreadings of the clouds, <span class='add'>or</span> the noise of his tabernacle?
<span class="verse" id="JB36_30">30&#160;</span> Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it, and covereth <a href='#FN446' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the bottom of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_31">31&#160;</span> For by them judgeth he the people; he giveth meat in abundance.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_32">32&#160;</span> With clouds he covereth the light; and commandeth it <span class='add'>not to shine</span> by <span class='add'>the cloud</span> that cometh betwixt.
<span class="verse" id="JB36_33">33&#160;</span> The noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the cattle also concerning <a href='#FN447' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the vapour.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_1">1&#160;</span> At this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of his place.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN448' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Hear attentively the noise of his voice, and the sound <span class='add'>that</span> goeth out of his mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_3">3&#160;</span> He directeth it under the whole heaven, and his <a href='#FN449' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lightning unto the <a href='#FN450' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ends of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_4">4&#160;</span> After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his excellency; and he will not stay them when his voice is heard.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_5">5&#160;</span> God thundereth marvellously with his voice; great things doeth he, which we cannot comprehend. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_6">6&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN451' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he saith to the snow, Be thou <span class='add'>on</span> the earth; <a href='#FN452' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>likewise to the small rain, and to the great rain of his strength.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_7">7&#160;</span> He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_8">8&#160;</span> Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN453' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the <a href='#FN454' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>north.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_10">10&#160;</span> By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is straitened.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_11">11&#160;</span> Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scattereth <a href='#FN455' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his bright cloud:
<span class="verse" id="JB37_12">12&#160;</span> And it is turned round about by his counsels: that they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the world in the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_13">13&#160;</span> He causeth it to come, whether for <a href='#FN456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>correction, or for his land, or for mercy.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_14">14&#160;</span> Hearken unto this, O Job: stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_15">15&#160;</span> Dost thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine?
<span class="verse" id="JB37_16">16&#160;</span> Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge?
<span class="verse" id="JB37_17">17&#160;</span> How thy garments <span class='add'>are</span> warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south <span class='add'>wind</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JB37_18">18&#160;</span> Hast thou with him spread out the sky, <span class='add'>which is</span> strong, <span class='add'>and</span> as a molten looking glass?
<span class="verse" id="JB37_19">19&#160;</span> Teach us what we shall say unto him; <span class='add'>for</span> we cannot order <span class='add'>our speech</span> by reason of darkness.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_20">20&#160;</span> Shall it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shall be swallowed up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_21">21&#160;</span>And now <span class='add'>men</span> see not the bright light which <span class='add'>is</span> in the clouds: but the wind passeth, and cleanseth them.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN457' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Fair weather cometh out of the north: with God <span class='add'>is</span> terrible majesty.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Touching</span> the Almighty, we cannot find him out: <span class='add'>he is</span> excellent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict.
<span class="verse" id="JB37_24">24&#160;</span> Men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any <span class='add'>that are</span> wise of heart.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_1">1&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_2">2&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_3">3&#160;</span> Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I will demand of thee, and <a href='#FN458' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>answer thou me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, <a href='#FN460' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>if thou hast understanding.
<span class="verse" id="JB38_5">5&#160;</span> Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_6">6&#160;</span> Whereupon are the <a href='#FN461' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>foundations thereof <a href='#FN462' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof;
<span class="verse" id="JB38_7">7&#160;</span> When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN463' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Or <span class='add'>who</span> shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth, <span class='add'>as if</span> it had issued out of the womb?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_9">9&#160;</span> When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a swaddlingband for it,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brake up for it my decreed <span class='add'>place</span>, and set bars and doors,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_11">11&#160;</span> And said, Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shall <a href='#FN465' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy proud waves be stayed?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_12">12&#160;</span> Hast thou commanded the morning since thy days; <span class='add'>and</span> caused the dayspring to know his place;
<span class="verse" id="JB38_13">13&#160;</span> That it might take hold of the <a href='#FN466' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ends of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_14">14&#160;</span> It is turned as clay <span class='add'>to</span> the seal; and they stand as a garment.
<span class="verse" id="JB38_15">15&#160;</span> And from the wicked their light is withholden, and the high arm shall be broken.
<span class="verse" id="JB38_16">16&#160;</span> Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of the depth?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_17">17&#160;</span> Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or hast thou seen the doors of the shadow of death?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_18">18&#160;</span> Hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare if thou knowest it all.
<span class="verse" id="JB38_19">19&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>is</span> the way <span class='add'>where</span> light dwelleth? and <span class='add'>as for</span> darkness, where <span class='add'>is</span> the place thereof,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_20">20&#160;</span> That thou shouldest take it <a href='#FN467' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths <span class='add'>to</span> the house thereof?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_21">21&#160;</span> Knowest thou <span class='add'>it</span>, because thou wast then born? or <span class='add'>because</span> the number of thy days <span class='add'>is</span> great?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_22">22&#160;</span> Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen the treasures of the hail,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_23">23&#160;</span> Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_24">24&#160;</span> By what way is the light parted, <span class='add'>which</span> scattereth the east wind upon the earth? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_25">25&#160;</span> Who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder;
<span class="verse" id="JB38_26">26&#160;</span> To cause it to rain on the earth, <span class='add'>where</span> no man <span class='add'>is; on</span> the wilderness, wherein <span class='add'>there is</span> no man;
<span class="verse" id="JB38_27">27&#160;</span> To satisfy the desolate and waste <span class='add'>ground;</span> and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_28">28&#160;</span> Hath the rain a father? or who hath begotten the drops of dew?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_29">29&#160;</span> Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_30">30&#160;</span> The waters are hid as <span class='add'>with</span> a stone, and the face of the deep <a href='#FN468' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is frozen.
<span class="verse" id="JB38_31">31&#160;</span> Canst thou bind the sweet influences of <a href='#FN469' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN470' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Pleiades, or loose the bands of <a href='#FN471' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Orion?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_32">32&#160;</span> Canst thou bring forth <a href='#FN472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Mazzaroth in his season? or canst thou <a href='#FN473' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>guide Arcturus with his sons?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_33">33&#160;</span> Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_34">34&#160;</span> Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_35">35&#160;</span> Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go, and say unto thee, <a href='#FN474' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Here we <span class='add'>are</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_36">36&#160;</span><a href='#FN475' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_37">37&#160;</span> Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or <a href='#FN476' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>who can stay the bottles of heaven,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN477' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> When the dust <a href='#FN478' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>groweth into hardness, and the clods cleave fast together?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_39">39&#160;</span><a href='#FN479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fill <a href='#FN480' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the appetite of the young lions,
<span class="verse" id="JB38_40">40&#160;</span> When they couch in <span class='add'>their</span> dens, <span class='add'>and</span> abide in the covert to lie in wait?
<span class="verse" id="JB38_41">41&#160;</span><a href='#FN481' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who provideth for the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_1">1&#160;</span> Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? <span class='add'>or</span> canst thou mark when <a href='#FN482' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the hinds do calve?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_2">2&#160;</span> Canst thou number the months <span class='add'>that</span> they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they bring forth?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_3">3&#160;</span> They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out their sorrows.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_4">4&#160;</span> Their young ones are in good liking, they grow up with corn; they go forth, and return not unto them.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_5">5&#160;</span> Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loosed the bands of the wild ass?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_6">6&#160;</span> Whose house I have made the wilderness, and the <a href='#FN483' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>barren land his dwellings.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_7">7&#160;</span> He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regardeth he the crying <a href='#FN484' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of the driver.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_8">8&#160;</span> The range of the mountains <span class='add'>is</span> his pasture, and he searcheth after every green thing.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_9">9&#160;</span> Will the unicorn be willing to serve thee, or abide by thy crib?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_10">10&#160;</span> Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the furrow? or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_11">11&#160;</span> Wilt thou trust him, because his strength <span class='add'>is</span> great? or wilt thou leave thy labour to him?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_12">12&#160;</span> Wilt thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather <span class='add'>it into</span> thy barn? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Gavest thou</span> the goodly wings unto the peacocks? or <a href='#FN485' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wings and feathers unto the ostrich?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_14">14&#160;</span> Which leaveth her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust,
<span class="verse" id="JB39_15">15&#160;</span> And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_16">16&#160;</span> She is hardened against her young ones, as though <span class='add'>they were</span> not hers: her labour is in vain without fear;
<span class="verse" id="JB39_17">17&#160;</span> Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he imparted to her understanding.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_18">18&#160;</span> What time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse and his rider. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_19">19&#160;</span> Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_20">20&#160;</span> Canst thou make him afraid as a grasshopper? the glory of his nostrils <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN486' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>terrible.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN487' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in <span class='add'>his</span> strength: he goeth on to meet <a href='#FN488' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the armed men.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_22">22&#160;</span> He mocketh at fear, and is not affrighted; neither turneth he back from the sword.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_23">23&#160;</span> The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering spear and the shield.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_24">24&#160;</span> He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage: neither believeth he that <span class='add'>it is</span> the sound of the trumpet.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_25">25&#160;</span> He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_26">26&#160;</span> Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, <span class='add'>and</span> stretch her wings toward the south?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_27">27&#160;</span> Doth the eagle mount up <a href='#FN489' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at thy command, and make her nest on high?
<span class="verse" id="JB39_28">28&#160;</span> She dwelleth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_29">29&#160;</span> From thence she seeketh the prey, <span class='add'>and</span> her eyes behold afar off.
<span class="verse" id="JB39_30">30&#160;</span> Her young ones also suck up blood: and <a href='#FN490' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>where the slain <span class='add'>are</span>, there <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN491' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>she.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered Job, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB40_2">2&#160;</span> Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct <span class='add'>him</span>? he that reproveth God, let him answer it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Then Job answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB40_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_5">5&#160;</span> Once have I spoken; but I will not answer: yea, twice; but I will proceed no further. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB40_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Gird up thy loins now like a man: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN493' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wilt thou also disannul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous?
<span class="verse" id="JB40_9">9&#160;</span> Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice like him?
<span class="verse" id="JB40_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN494' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Deck thyself now <span class='add'>with</span> majesty and excellency; and array thyself with glory and beauty.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_11">11&#160;</span> Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one <span class='add'>that is</span> proud, and abase him.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_12">12&#160;</span> Look on every one <span class='add'>that is</span> proud, <span class='add'>and</span> bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_13">13&#160;</span> Hide them in the dust together; <span class='add'>and</span> bind their faces in secret.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_14">14&#160;</span> Then will I also confess unto thee that thine own right hand can save thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Behold now <a href='#FN495' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_16">16&#160;</span> Lo now, his strength <span class='add'>is</span> in his loins, and his force <span class='add'>is</span> in the navel of his belly.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN496' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped together.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_18">18&#160;</span> His bones <span class='add'>are as</span> strong pieces of brass; his bones <span class='add'>are</span> like bars of iron.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_19">19&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is</span> the chief of the ways of God: he that made him can make his sword to approach <span class='add'>unto him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_20">20&#160;</span> Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field play.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_21">21&#160;</span> He lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_22">22&#160;</span> The shady trees cover him <span class='add'>with</span> their shadow; the willows of the brook compass him about.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_23">23&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN497' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he drinketh up a river, <span class='add'>and</span> hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB40_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN498' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He taketh it with his eyes: <span class='add'>his</span> nose pierceth through snares.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_1">1&#160;</span> Canst thou draw out <a href='#FN499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>leviathan with an hook? or his tongue with a cord <a href='#FN500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>which</span> thou lettest down?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_2">2&#160;</span> Canst thou put an hook into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_3">3&#160;</span> Will he make many supplications unto thee? will he speak soft <span class='add'>words</span> unto thee?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_4">4&#160;</span> Will he make a covenant with thee? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_5">5&#160;</span> Wilt thou play with him as <span class='add'>with</span> a bird? <a href='#FN501' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_6">6&#160;</span> Shall the companions make a banquet of him? shall they part him among the merchants?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_7">7&#160;</span> Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_8">8&#160;</span> Lay thine hand upon him, remember the battle, do no more.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shall not <span class='add'>one</span> be cast down even at the sight of him?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_10">10&#160;</span>None <span class='add'>is so</span> fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_11">11&#160;</span> Who hath prevented me, that I should repay <span class='add'>him? <a href='#FN502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whatsoever is</span> under the whole heaven is mine.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_12">12&#160;</span> I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_13">13&#160;</span> Who can discover the face of his garment? <span class='add'>or</span> who can come <span class='add'>to him</span> <a href='#FN503' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with his double bridle?
<span class="verse" id="JB41_14">14&#160;</span> Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth <span class='add'>are</span> terrible round about.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>His</span> <a href='#FN504' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>scales <span class='add'>are his</span> pride, shut up together <span class='add'>as with</span> a close seal.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_16">16&#160;</span> One is so near to another, that no air can come between them.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_17">17&#160;</span> They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they cannot be sundered.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_18">18&#160;</span> By his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes <span class='add'>are</span> like the eyelids of the morning.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_19">19&#160;</span> Out of his mouth go burning lamps, <span class='add'>and</span> sparks of fire leap out.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_20">20&#160;</span> Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as <span class='add'>out</span> of a seething pot or caldron.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_21">21&#160;</span> His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_22">22&#160;</span> In his neck remaineth strength, and <a href='#FN505' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sorrow is turned into joy before him.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN506' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they cannot be moved.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_24">24&#160;</span> His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether <span class='add'>millstone</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_25">25&#160;</span> When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_26">26&#160;</span> The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the <a href='#FN507' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>habergeon.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_27">27&#160;</span> He esteemeth iron as straw, <span class='add'>and</span> brass as rotten wood.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_28">28&#160;</span> The arrow cannot make him flee: slingstones are turned with him into stubble.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_29">29&#160;</span> Darts are counted as stubble: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN508' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Sharp stones <span class='add'>are</span> under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_31">31&#160;</span> He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_32">32&#160;</span> He maketh a path to shine after him; <span class='add'>one</span> would think the deep <span class='add'>to be</span> hoary.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_33">33&#160;</span> Upon earth there is not his like, <a href='#FN509' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>who is made without fear.
<span class="verse" id="JB41_34">34&#160;</span> He beholdeth all high <span class='add'>things:</span> he <span class='add'>is</span> a king over all the children of pride.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_1">1&#160;</span> Then Job answered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said,
<span class="verse" id="JB42_2">2&#160;</span> I know that thou canst do every <span class='add'>thing</span>, and <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN510' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>no thought can be withholden from thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN511' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who <span class='add'>is</span> he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_4">4&#160;</span> Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak: I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto me.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_5">5&#160;</span> I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth thee.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore I abhor <span class='add'>myself</span>, and repent in dust and ashes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that after the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken these words unto Job, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me <span class='add'>the thing that is</span> right, as my servant Job <span class='add'>hath</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you: for <a href='#FN512' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>him will I accept: lest I deal with you <span class='add'>after your</span> folly, in that ye have not spoken of me <span class='add'>the thing which is</span> right, like my servant Job.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_9">9&#160;</span> So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite <span class='add'>and</span> Zophar the Naamathite went, and did according as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded them: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also accepted <a href='#FN513' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Job.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_10">10&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN514' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gave Job twice as much as he had before.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_11">11&#160;</span> Then came there unto him all his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over all the evil that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earring of gold.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_12">12&#160;</span> So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning: for he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_13">13&#160;</span> He had also seven sons and three daughters.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_14">14&#160;</span> And he called the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Keren-happuch.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_15">15&#160;</span> And in all the land were no women found <span class='add'>so</span> fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_16">16&#160;</span> After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons’ sons, <span class='add'>even</span> four generations.
<span class="verse" id="JB42_17">17&#160;</span> So Job died, <span class='add'>being</span> old and full of days. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cattle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, husbandry.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sons of the cast.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings 21. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K121_10'>10</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K121_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb all the days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the adversary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the midst of them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_8'>5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Hast thou set thy heart on.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cattle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. if he curse thee not to thy face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, A great fire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rushed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from aside, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, robe.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_15'>5. 15</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_7'>6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, attributed folly to God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 1. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_1'>1</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to swallow him up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, only.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. answered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 10. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_13'>13</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_19'>19</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR20_14'>20. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, challenge it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, let them terrify it, as those who have a bitter day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, let it not rejoice among the days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a leviathan.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the eyelids of the morning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wearied in strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wait.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB19_8'>19. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before my meat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB3_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I feared a fear, and it came upon me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who can refrain from words?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the bowing knees.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 confidence; the uprightness of thy ways and thy hope?]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_8'>22. 8</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS10_13'>10. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_33'>30. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by stealth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. met me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the multitude of my bones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I heard a still voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_15'>15. 15</a> 2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_4'>2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, nor in his angels, in whom he put light.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 on]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_1'>5 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB4_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. beaten in pieces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, look?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, indignation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, labour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the sons of the burning coal let up to fly</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_10'>9. 10</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_18'>72. 18</a> Rom <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_33'>11 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and there is no search.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. till there be no number.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. outplaces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_7'>2 7</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS113_7'>113. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Neh. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH4_15'>4. 15</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_10'>33. 10</a>. Isai <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_10'>8. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cannot perform any thing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C13_19'>3. 19</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_29'>28 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, run into.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_42'>107. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_12'>3. 12</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_5'>12. 5</a>. James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_12'>1. 12</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_19'>3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">32. 39. 1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_6'>2. 6</a> Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_26'>30. 26</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_3'>91. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when the tongue scourgeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_18'>2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that peace is thy tabernacle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, err.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, much.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ascendeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for thyself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lifted up</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, I want words to express my grief.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS38_2'>38. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb at grass.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb my expectation</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. brasen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. To him that melteth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they are cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the heat thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. extinguished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, For now ye are like to them. Heb. to it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ye cause to fall upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before your face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, in this matter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB6_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a warfare.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gapeth after.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the evening be measured?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB16_22'>16. 22</a>. Pa. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB90_6'>90. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB102_11'>102. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB103_15'>103. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB144_4'>144. 4</a>. Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_6'>40. 6</a> James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_14'>4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall not return.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">to see, that is, to enjoy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, I can live no longer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. than my bones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS8_4'>8 4</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS144_3'>144. 3</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB2_6'>2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_4'>32. 4</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R219_7'>19. 7</a>. Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_14'>9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the hand of their transgression.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_23'>22. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_32'>4. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_9'>47. 9</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_15'>29. 15</a>. ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_6'>7. 6</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS89_5'>89. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS144_4'>144. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS129_6'>129. 6</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_6'>17. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB11_20'>11. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_14'>18. 14</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_10'>112. 10</a> Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a spider's house.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb take the ungodly by the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shouting for joy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB8_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall not be.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS143_2'>143. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, before God?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb heights.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_31'>38. 31</a>, &amp;c. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_8'>5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ash. Cesil, and Cimah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_9'>5 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_9'>45. 9</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_6'>18. 6</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_20'>9. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who can turn him away?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. helpers of pride, or, strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ships of desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ships of Ebeh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, make me to be abhorred.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. one that should argue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, umpire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB9_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb but I am not so with myself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cut off while I live.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the labour of thine hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. It is upon thy knowledge.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. took pains about me</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 139 <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_14'>14</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_15'>15</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 cruddled]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb hedged.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, thy plagues.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_11'>3. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB10_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_6'>7. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_9'>8. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a man of lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, devices</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the heights of heaven.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, make a change.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who can turn him away?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. empty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shalt arise above the noonday</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_6'>26. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. intreat thy face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. flight shall perish from them</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_14'>8. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_14'>18 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a puff of breath.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I fall not lower than you.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with whom are not such as these?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all flesh of man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_3'>34. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, With God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS22_22'>22. 22</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_7'>3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_9'>32. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the lip of the faithful.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, looseth the girdle of the strong.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. leadeth in.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB12_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wander.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB13_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Be silent from me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB13_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. prove, or, argue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB13_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_7'>25. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB13_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. observest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB13_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. roots.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. short of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_9'>8. 9</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_11'>102. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_15'>103. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS144_4'>144. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Who will give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS51_5'>51. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cease.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is weakened, or, cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_2'>139. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fadeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. overflowest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. knowledge of wind.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thou makest void.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, speech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. teacheth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_34'>11 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_46'>8. 46</a> 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_36'>6. 36</a>. ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_4'>14. 4</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS14_3'>14. 3</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_9'>20. 9</a>. 1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#J11_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_18'>4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A sound of fears.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cut off.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_14'>7. 14</a> Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_4'>59. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB15_35"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, troublesome.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB13_4'>13 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words of wind.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. what goeth from me?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hath shut me up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the high places.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are my scorners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, friend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB16_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. years of number.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, spirit is spent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lodge.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, before them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, my thoughts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall add strength</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the possessions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. near.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cried, or, called.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lamp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_9"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 18.9</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 grin]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hidden.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. scatter him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bars.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_14'>8. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB11_20'>11. 20</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_10'>112. 10</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_22'>2. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. They shall drive him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lived with him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB18_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. laid hold on horror,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, harden yourselves against me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, violence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my belly</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the wicked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_9'>41. 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS55_20'>55. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the men of my secret.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Who will give, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, After I shall awake, though this body be destroyed, yet out of my flesh shall I see God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a stranger.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in my bosom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB19_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and what root of matter is found in me?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my haste is in me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 37. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_35'>35</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_35'>35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from near.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cloud.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The poor shall oppress his children.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the midst of his palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, streaming brooks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to the substance of his exchange.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. crushed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. 5. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_13'>13</a>, <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. know.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, There shall be none left for his meat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, troublesome.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 glistering]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB20_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of his decree from God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shortened?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Look unto me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS17_10'>17. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_12'>73. 12</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR12_1'>12. 1</a>. Hab. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK1_16'>1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are peace from fear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in mirth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_17'>22. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lamp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stealeth away</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.19</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, the punishment of his iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his very perfection, or, in the strength of his perfection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, milk pails.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the tent of the tabernacles of the wicked?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_4'>16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the day of wraths.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. graves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. watch in the heap.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. transgression?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, if he may be profitable, doth his good success depend thereon?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stripped the clothes of the naked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the man of arm.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eminent, or, accepted for countenance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the head of the stars.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, What.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a flood was poured upon their foundation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_14'>21. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to them?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_16'>21. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_42'>107. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, estate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, their excellency.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, with God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_5'>8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, on the dust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gold.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. silver of strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. him that hath low eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB22_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The innocent shall deliver the island.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB23_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB23_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the way that is with me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB23_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I have hid, or, laid up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB23_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, my appointed portion</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB23_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_8'>115. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_14'>19. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_17'>27. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, feed them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mingled corn, or, dredge.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the wicked gather the vintage.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. setteth his face in secret.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. violently take.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he trusteth not his own life</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. closed up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB25_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_17'>4. 17</a>, &amp;c. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_14'>15. 14</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB25_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_6'>22. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB26_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with the inhabitants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB26_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_11'>15. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB26_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. until the end of light with darkness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB26_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pride.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. added to take up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made my soul bitter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.3</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, the breath which God gave him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from my days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_26'>16. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_28'>1. 28</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK8_18'>8. 18</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_31'>9. 31</a>. James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_3'>4. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, being in the hand, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_64'>78. 64</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_11'>18. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB27_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in fleeing he would flee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a mine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gold ore.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, flint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from weeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. 11. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_33'>33</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_34'>34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Fine gold shall not be given for it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_14'>3. 14</a>. &amp;c 8. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_11'>11</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_19'>19</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, vessels of fine gold.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ramoth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_12'>12</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, heaven.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, did number it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS111_10'>111 10</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>1. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_10'>9 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. added to take up</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lamp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with me</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The voice of the nobles was hid.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the jawteeth, or, the grinders.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I cast.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb opened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. new.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB29_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. changed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of fewer days than I.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dark as the night.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 flying]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. yester-night.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 clifts]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. holes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men of no name</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS35_15'>35. 15</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_12'>69. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and withhold not spittle from my face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my principal one.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb turned to be cruel.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the strength of thy hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wisdom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heap.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS35_13'>35. 13</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for him that was hard of day?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_6'>102. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB30_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ostriches.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.4</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_9'>16 9</a>. ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_21'>34. 21</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_21'>5. 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_3'>15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Let him weigh me in balances of justice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, did he not fashion us in one womb?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.18</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, the widow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the chanelbone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found much.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the light.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb bright.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my hand hath kissed my mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to the way.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, after the manner of men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_35"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, behold, my sign is that the Almighty will answer me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weep.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the strength thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. caused the soul of the owners thereof to expire, or, breathe out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB31_40"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, noisome weeds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from answering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. expected Job in words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. elder for days</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. few of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I feared.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_36'>38. 36</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_6'>2. 6</a>. Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_26'>2. 26</a>. Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN1_17'>1. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_21'>2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. understandings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 32.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ordered his words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they removed speeches from themselves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the spirit of my belly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is not opened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that I may breathe.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in my palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_35'>9. 35</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB13_20'>13 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb according to thy mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb cut out of the clay.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in mine ears.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he answereth not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he revealeth, or, uncovereth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. work.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb from passing by the sword.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_18'>107. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. meat of desire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_22"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 33.22</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits Yea,]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, an atonement.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. than childhood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He shall look upon men, and say, I have sinned, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He hath delivered my soul, &amp;c. and my life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB33_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. twice and thrice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mine arrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_4'>32. 4</a> ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_3'>8. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB36_23'>36. 23</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS92_15'>92. 15</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_14'>9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>62. 12</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_12'>24. 12</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_19'>32. 19</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK33_20'>33. 20</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_27'>16. 27</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_6'>2. 6</a> 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_10'>5. 10</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_17'>1. 17</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb all of it?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_29'>104. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>3. 19</a>. Eccles <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC12_7'>12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bind?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_17'>10. 17</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R219_7'>19. 7</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC10_34'>10. 34</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_11'>2. 11</a>. Gal <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL2_6'>2. 6</a> Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_9'>6 9</a>. Col. <a href='COL.xhtml#CL3_25'>3. 25</a> 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they shall take away the mighty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.21</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_9'>16. 9</a>. ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_4'>31. 4</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_21'>5. 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_3'>15. 3</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_17'>16. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. go.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. without searching out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. crushed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the place of beholders.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from after him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Should it be from with thee?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB34_36"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 34.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, My father, let Job be tried.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB35_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, by it more than by my sin?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB35_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I will return to thee words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB35_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_3'>22. 3</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_2'>16. 2</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_35'>11. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB35_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_9'>27. 9</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_28'>1. 28</a>. Isai. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_15'>1. 15</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_11'>11. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB35_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.15</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB35_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 35.15</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Job.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that there are yet words for God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, afflicted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_15'>34. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_13'>21. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they shall pass away by the sword.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Their soul dieth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sodomites.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, afflicted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the rest of thy table.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 36.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, judgment and justice should uphold thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. turn thee aside.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the roots.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB36_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that which goeth up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Hear in hearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. light.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wings of the earth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 147. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_16'>16</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. and to the shower of rain, and to the showers of rain of his strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Out of the chamber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. scattering winds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the cloud of his light.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a rod.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB37_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Gold.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb make me know.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_5'>104. 5</a>. Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_4'>30. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. if thou knowest understanding.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sockets.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made to sink?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_9'>104. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, established my decree upon it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the pride of thy waves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, at.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is taken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the seven stars.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Cimah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Cesil?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the twelve signs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. guide them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Behold us?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.36</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_8'>32. 8</a>. Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_26'>2. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb who can cause to lie down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_38"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 38.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, When the dust is turned into mire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is poured.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_21'>104. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_39"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB38_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_9'>147. 9</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_26'>6. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS29_9'>29. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. salt places.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of the exactor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 39.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the feathers of the stork and ostrich.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. terror.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 39.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, His feet dig.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the armour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by thy mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_28'>24. 28</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_37'>17. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB39_30"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 he]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_3'>38. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_21'>50. 21</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_4'>3. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_1'>104. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the elephant, as some think.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He setteth up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 40.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he oppresseth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB40_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 40.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Will any take him in his sight, or, bore his nose with a gin?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.1</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, a whale, or, a whirlpool.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which thou drownest?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 41.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits or]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_1'>24. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_12'>50. 12</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_26'>10. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, within.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strong pieces of shields.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sorrow rejoiceth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The fallings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, breast-plate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Sharp pieces of the potsherd.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 41.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, who behave themselves without fear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB42_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 42.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, no thought of thine can be hindered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB42_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB33_2'>33. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB42_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his face, or, person.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB42_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the face of Job.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB42_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 42.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. added [all that had been] to Job unto the double.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
