<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Joel 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Joel</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JOL.xhtml#JL1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_0'>3</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JL0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Joel  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JL1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JL1_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_2">2&#160;</span> Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or even in the days of your fathers?
<span class="verse" id="JL1_3">3&#160;</span> Tell ye your children of it, and <span class='add'>let</span> your children <span class='add'>tell</span> their children, and their children another generation.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> That which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpiller eaten.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_5">5&#160;</span> Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_6">6&#160;</span> For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose teeth <span class='add'>are</span> the teeth of a lion, and he hath the cheek teeth of a great lion.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_7">7&#160;</span> He hath laid my vine waste, and <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>barked my fig tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> away; the branches thereof are made white.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL1_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_9">9&#160;</span> The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; the priests, the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> ministers, mourn.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_10">10&#160;</span> The field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted: the new wine is <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dried up, the oil languisheth.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_11">11&#160;</span> Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_12">12&#160;</span> The vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth; the pomegranate tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree, <span class='add'>even</span> all the trees of the field, are withered: because joy is withered away from the sons of men.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_13">13&#160;</span> Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the meat offering and the drink offering is withholden from the house of your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL1_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sanctify ye a fast, call a <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>solemn assembly, gather the elders <span class='add'>and</span> all the inhabitants of the land <span class='add'>into</span> the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and cry unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>,
<span class="verse" id="JL1_15">15&#160;</span> Alas for the day! for <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_16">16&#160;</span> Is not the meat cut off before <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>our eyes, <span class='add'>yea</span>, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
<span class="verse" id="JL1_17">17&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>seed is rotten under their clods, the garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn is withered.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_18">18&#160;</span> How do the beasts groan! the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_19">19&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to thee will I cry: for the fire hath devoured the <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath burned all the trees of the field.
<span class="verse" id="JL1_20">20&#160;</span> The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of waters are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JL2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL2_1">1&#160;</span> Blow ye the <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cometh, for <span class='add'>it is</span> nigh at hand;
<span class="verse" id="JL2_2">2&#160;</span> A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it, <span class='add'>even</span> to the years <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of many generations.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_3">3&#160;</span> A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth: the land <span class='add'>is</span> as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness; yea, and nothing shall escape them.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_4">4&#160;</span> The appearance of them <span class='add'>is</span> as the appearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_5">5&#160;</span> Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_6">6&#160;</span> Before their face the people shall be much pained: all faces shall gather <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blackness.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_7">7&#160;</span> They shall run like mighty men; they shall climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not break their ranks:
<span class="verse" id="JL2_8">8&#160;</span> Neither shall one thrust another; they shall walk every one in his path: and <span class='add'>when</span> they fall upon the <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sword, they shall not be wounded.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_9">9&#160;</span> They shall run to and fro in the city; they shall run upon the wall, they shall climb up upon the houses; they shall enter in at the windows like a thief.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_10">10&#160;</span> The earth shall quake before them; the heavens shall tremble: <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars shall withdraw their shining:
<span class="verse" id="JL2_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall utter his voice before his army: for his camp <span class='add'>is</span> very great: for <span class='add'>he is</span> strong that executeth his word: for the <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> great and very terrible; and who can abide it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Therefore also now, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>turn ye <span class='add'>even</span> to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:
<span class="verse" id="JL2_13">13&#160;</span> And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God: for he <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who knoweth <span class='add'>if</span> he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; <span class='add'>even</span> a meat offering and a drink offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL2_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Blow the trumpet in Zion, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly:
<span class="verse" id="JL2_16">16&#160;</span> Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_17">17&#160;</span> Let the priests, the ministers of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rule over them: <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wherefore should they say among the people, Where <span class='add'>is</span> their God?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL2_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be jealous for his land, and pity his people.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_19">19&#160;</span> Yea, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith: and I will no more make you a reproach among the heathen:
<span class="verse" id="JL2_20">20&#160;</span> But I will remove far off from you the northern <span class='add'>army</span>, and will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour shall come up, because <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he hath done great things.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL2_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will do great things.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_22">22&#160;</span> Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_23">23&#160;</span> Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God: for he hath given you <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the former rain <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>moderately, and he <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>will cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first <span class='add'>month</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_24">24&#160;</span> And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with wine and oil.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_25">25&#160;</span> And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpiller, and the palmerworm, my great army which I sent among you.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_26">26&#160;</span> And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_27">27&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> in the midst of Israel, and <span class='add'>that</span> I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL2_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass afterward, <span class='add'>that</span> I <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions:
<span class="verse" id="JL2_29">29&#160;</span> And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_30">30&#160;</span> And I will shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> come.
<span class="verse" id="JL2_32">32&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whosoever shall call on the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said, and in the remnant whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall call.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JL3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL3_1">1&#160;</span> For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
<span class="verse" id="JL3_2">2&#160;</span> I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people and <span class='add'>for</span> my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_3">3&#160;</span> And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_4">4&#160;</span> Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompence? and if ye recompense me, swiftly <span class='add'>and</span> speedily will I return your recompence upon your own head;
<span class="verse" id="JL3_5">5&#160;</span> Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your temples my goodly <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant things:
<span class="verse" id="JL3_6">6&#160;</span> The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompence upon your own head:
<span class="verse" id="JL3_8">8&#160;</span> And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far off: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL3_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near; let them come up:
<span class="verse" id="JL3_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Beat your plowshares into swords, and your <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pruninghooks into spears: let the weak say, I <span class='add'>am</span> strong.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_11">11&#160;</span> Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cause thy mighty ones to come down, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="JL3_12">12&#160;</span> Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the press is full, the fats overflow; for <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>their wickedness <span class='add'>is</span> great.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_14">14&#160;</span> Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>decision: for the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> near in the valley of decision.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_15">15&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_16">16&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also shall <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall shake: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>will be</span> the <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_17">17&#160;</span> So shall ye know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>holy, and there shall no <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>strangers pass through her any more.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JL3_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the mountains shall <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and shall water the valley of Shittim.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_19">19&#160;</span> Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence <span class='add'>against</span> the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_20">20&#160;</span> But Judah shall <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.
<span class="verse" id="JL3_21">21&#160;</span> For I will cleanse their blood <span class='add'>that</span> I have not cleansed: <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> dwelleth in Zion.<span class='nd'></span> </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The residue of the palmerworm.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. laid my fig tree for a barking</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ashamed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_15'>2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, day of restraint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_6'>13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 your]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. grains.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL1_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, habitations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cornet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of generation and generation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, dart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_10'>13 10</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_7'>32. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_7'>30. 7</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_18'>5. 18</a>. Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP1_15'>1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_1'>4 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_6'>34 6</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS86_5'>86 5</a>. Jonah <a href='JON.xhtml#JH4_2'>4 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Jonah <a href='JON.xhtml#JH3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL1_14'>1 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, use a byword against them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS42_10'>42. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_10'>79. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_2'>115. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. he hath magnified to do.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a teacher of righteousness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to righteousness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_4'>26. 4</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_14'>11. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_3'>44. 3</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_17'>2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.31</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_15'>3 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL2_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_13'>10. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the sons of the Grecians.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Sanctify.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_4'>2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, scythes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">the <span class="sc">Lord</span> shall bring down.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_15'>14. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, concision, or, threshing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_31'>2. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_30'>25. 30</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_2'>1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. place of repair, or, harbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb holiness</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_27'>21. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM9_13'>9 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. go.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, abide.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JL3_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">even I the <span class="sc">Lord</span> that dwelleth in Zion.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
