<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Lamentations 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Lamentations</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM5_0'>5</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='LM0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Lamentations of Jeremiah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="LM1_1">1&#160;</span> How doth the city sit solitary, <span class='add'>that was</span> full of people! <span class='add'>how</span> is she become as a widow! she <span class='add'>that was</span> great among the nations, <span class='add'>and</span> princess among the provinces, <span class='add'>how</span> is she become tributary!
<span class="verse" id="LM1_2">2&#160;</span> She <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>weepeth sore in the <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>night, and her tears <span class='add'>are</span> on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort <span class='add'>her:</span> all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_3">3&#160;</span> Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>because of great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all her persecutors overtook her between the straits.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_4">4&#160;</span> The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she <span class='add'>is</span> in bitterness.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_5">5&#160;</span> Her adversaries <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: her <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>children are gone into captivity before the enemy.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_6">6&#160;</span> And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts <span class='add'>that</span> find no pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_7">7&#160;</span> Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the adversaries saw her, <span class='add'>and</span> did mock at her sabbaths.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_8">8&#160;</span> Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is removed: all that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_9">9&#160;</span> Her filthiness <span class='add'>is</span> in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end; therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, behold my affliction: for the enemy hath magnified <span class='add'>himself</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_10">10&#160;</span> The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pleasant things: for she hath seen <span class='add'>that</span> the heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom thou didst command <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they should not enter into thy congregation.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_11">11&#160;</span> All her people sigh, they seek bread; they have given their pleasant things for meat <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to relieve the soul: see, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and consider; for I am become vile.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>Is it</span> nothing to you, all ye that <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath afflicted <span class='add'>me</span> in the day of his fierce anger.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_13">13&#160;</span> From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate <span class='add'>and</span> faint all the day.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_14">14&#160;</span> The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, <span class='add'>and</span> come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall, the Lord hath delivered me into <span class='add'>their</span> hands, <span class='add'>from whom</span> I am not able to rise up.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_15">15&#160;</span> The Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty <span class='add'>men</span> in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men: the Lord hath trodden <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the virgin, the daughter of Judah, <span class='add'>as</span> in a winepress.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_16">16&#160;</span>For these <span class='add'>things</span> I weep; <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mine eye, mine eye runneth down with water, because the comforter that should <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_17">17&#160;</span> Zion spreadeth forth her hands, <span class='add'>and there is</span> none to comfort her: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded concerning Jacob, <span class='add'>that</span> his adversaries <span class='add'>should be</span> round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM1_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>righteous; for I have rebelled against his <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_19">19&#160;</span> I called for my lovers, <span class='add'>but</span> they deceived me: my priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to relieve their souls.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_20">20&#160;</span> Behold, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for I <span class='add'>am</span> in distress: my <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home <span class='add'>there is</span> as death.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_21">21&#160;</span> They have heard that I sigh: <span class='add'>there is</span> none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast done <span class='add'>it:</span> thou wilt bring the day <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>called, and they shall be like unto me.
<span class="verse" id="LM1_22">22&#160;</span> Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs <span class='add'>are</span> many, and my heart <span class='add'>is</span> faint.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM2_1">1&#160;</span> How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, <span class='add'>and</span> cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!
<span class="verse" id="LM2_2">2&#160;</span> The Lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he hath <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>brought <span class='add'>them</span> down to the ground: he hath polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_3">3&#160;</span> He hath cut off in <span class='add'>his</span> fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, <span class='add'>which</span> devoureth round about.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_4">4&#160;</span> He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all <span class='add'>that were</span> pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_5">5&#160;</span> The Lord was as an enemy: he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_6">6&#160;</span> And he hath violently <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>taken away his <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>tabernacle, as <span class='add'>if it were of</span> a garden: he hath destroyed his places of the assembly: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_7">7&#160;</span> The Lord hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary, he hath <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces; they have made a noise in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as in the day of a solemn feast.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_8">8&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament; they languished together.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_9">9&#160;</span> Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes <span class='add'>are</span> among the Gentiles: the law <span class='add'>is</span> no <span class='add'>more;</span> her <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets also find no vision from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM2_10">10&#160;</span> The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, <span class='add'>and</span> keep silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_11">11&#160;</span> Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the children and the sucklings <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>swoon in the streets of the city.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_12">12&#160;</span> They say to their mothers, Where <span class='add'>is</span> corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mothers’ bosom.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_13">13&#160;</span> What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach <span class='add'>is</span> great like the sea: who can heal thee?
<span class="verse" id="LM2_14">14&#160;</span> Thy <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee: and they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee false burdens and causes of banishment.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_15">15&#160;</span> All that pass <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by clap <span class='add'>their</span> hands at thee; they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, <span class='add'>saying, Is</span> this the city that <span class='add'>men</span> call <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?
<span class="verse" id="LM2_16">16&#160;</span> All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed <span class='add'>her</span> up: certainly this <span class='add'>is</span> the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_17">17&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath done <span class='add'>that</span> which he had <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused <span class='add'>thine</span> enemy to rejoice over thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_18">18&#160;</span> Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>let tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thine eye cease.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_19">19&#160;</span> Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the top of every street. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM2_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Behold, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit, <span class='add'>and</span> children <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of a span long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?
<span class="verse" id="LM2_21">21&#160;</span> The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain <span class='add'>them</span> in the day of thine anger; thou hast killed, <span class='add'>and</span> not pitied.
<span class="verse" id="LM2_22">22&#160;</span> Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anger none escaped nor remained: those that I have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_1">1&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_2">2&#160;</span> He hath led me, and brought <span class='add'>me into</span> darkness, but not <span class='add'>into</span> light.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_3">3&#160;</span> Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand <span class='add'>against me</span> all the day.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_4">4&#160;</span> My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_5">5&#160;</span> He hath builded against me, and compassed <span class='add'>me</span> with gall and travail.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_6">6&#160;</span> He hath set me in dark places, as <span class='add'>they that be</span> dead of old.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_7">7&#160;</span> He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my chain heavy.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_8">8&#160;</span> Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_9">9&#160;</span> He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths crooked.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_10">10&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>was</span> unto me <span class='add'>as</span> a bear lying in wait, <span class='add'>and as</span> a lion in secret places.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_11">11&#160;</span> He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he hath made me desolate.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_12">12&#160;</span> He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_13">13&#160;</span> He hath caused the <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_14">14&#160;</span> I was a <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>derision to all my people; <span class='add'>and</span> their song all the day.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_15">15&#160;</span> He hath filled me with <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bitterness, he hath made me drunken with wormwood.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_16">16&#160;</span> He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>covered me with ashes.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_17">17&#160;</span> And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prosperity.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_18">18&#160;</span> And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="LM3_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_20">20&#160;</span> My soul hath <span class='add'>them</span> still in remembrance, and is <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>humbled in me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_21">21&#160;</span> This I <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>It is of</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They are</span> new every morning: great <span class='add'>is</span> thy faithfulness.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_24">24&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> my <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in him.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> good unto them that wait for him, to the soul <span class='add'>that</span> seeketh him.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> good that <span class='add'>a man</span> should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_28">28&#160;</span> He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne <span class='add'>it</span> upon him.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_29">29&#160;</span> He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_30">30&#160;</span> He giveth <span class='add'>his</span> cheek to him that smiteth him: he is filled full with reproach.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_31">31&#160;</span> For the Lord will not cast off for ever:
<span class="verse" id="LM3_32">32&#160;</span> But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_33">33&#160;</span> For he doth not afflict <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>willingly nor grieve the children of men.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_34">34&#160;</span> To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,
<span class="verse" id="LM3_35">35&#160;</span> To turn aside the right of a man before the face of <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the most High,
<span class="verse" id="LM3_36">36&#160;</span> To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>approveth not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_37">37&#160;</span>¶ Who <span class='add'>is</span> he <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>that</span> saith, and it cometh to pass, <span class='add'>when</span> the Lord commandeth <span class='add'>it</span> not?
<span class="verse" id="LM3_38">38&#160;</span> Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth not <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evil and good?
<span class="verse" id="LM3_39">39&#160;</span> Wherefore doth a living man <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
<span class="verse" id="LM3_40">40&#160;</span> Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_41">41&#160;</span> Let us lift up our heart with <span class='add'>our</span> hands unto God in the heavens. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_42">42&#160;</span> We have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_43">43&#160;</span> Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_44">44&#160;</span> Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that <span class='add'>our</span> prayer should not pass through.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_45">45&#160;</span> Thou hast made us <span class='add'>as</span> the <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_46">46&#160;</span> All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_47">47&#160;</span><a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_48">48&#160;</span> Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_49">49&#160;</span> Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermission,
<span class="verse" id="LM3_50">50&#160;</span> Till the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> look down, and behold from heaven.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_51">51&#160;</span> Mine eye affecteth <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mine heart <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>because of all the daughters of my city.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_52">52&#160;</span> Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_53">53&#160;</span> They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_54">54&#160;</span> Waters flowed over mine head; <span class='add'>then</span> I said, I am cut off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_55">55&#160;</span>¶ I called upon thy name, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, out of the low dungeon.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_56">56&#160;</span> Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_57">57&#160;</span> Thou drewest near in the day <span class='add'>that</span> I called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear not.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_58">58&#160;</span> O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast redeemed my life.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_59">59&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_60">60&#160;</span> Thou hast seen all their vengeance <span class='add'>and</span> all their imaginations against me.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_61">61&#160;</span> Thou hast heard their reproach, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> all their imaginations against me;
<span class="verse" id="LM3_62">62&#160;</span> The lips of those that rose up against me, and their device against me all the day.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_63">63&#160;</span> Behold their sitting down, and their rising up; I <span class='add'>am</span> their musick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_64">64&#160;</span>¶ Render unto them a recompence, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to the work of their hands.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_65">65&#160;</span> Give them <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.
<span class="verse" id="LM3_66">66&#160;</span> Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heavens of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_1">1&#160;</span> How is the gold become dim! <span class='add'>how</span> is the most fine gold changed! the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_2">2&#160;</span> The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
<span class="verse" id="LM4_3">3&#160;</span> Even the <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people <span class='add'>is become</span> cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_4">4&#160;</span> The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst: the young children ask bread, <span class='add'>and</span> no man breaketh <span class='add'>it</span> unto them.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_5">5&#160;</span> They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_6">6&#160;</span> For the <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_7">7&#160;</span> Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing <span class='add'>was</span> of sapphire:
<span class="verse" id="LM4_8">8&#160;</span> Their visage is <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They that be</span> slain with the sword are better than <span class='add'>they that be</span> slain with hunger: for these <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pine away, stricken through for <span class='add'>want of</span> the fruits of the field.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_10">10&#160;</span> The hands of the pitiful women have <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sodden their own children: they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_11">11&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_12">12&#160;</span> The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For the sins of her prophets, <span class='add'>and</span> the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her,
<span class="verse" id="LM4_14">14&#160;</span> They have wandered <span class='add'>as</span> blind <span class='add'>men</span> in the streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>so that men could not touch their garments.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_15">15&#160;</span> They cried unto them, Depart ye; <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>it is</span> unclean; depart, depart, touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the heathen, They shall no more sojourn <span class='add'>there</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_16">16&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath divided them; he will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not the elders.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_17">17&#160;</span> As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching we have watched for a nation <span class='add'>that</span> could not save <span class='add'>us</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_18">18&#160;</span> They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_19">19&#160;</span> Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="LM4_20">20&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself naked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion; he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>discover thy sins.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM5_1">1&#160;</span> Remember, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our reproach.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_2">2&#160;</span> Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_3">3&#160;</span> We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers <span class='add'>are</span> as widows.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_4">4&#160;</span> We have drunken our water for money; our wood <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is sold unto us.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Our necks <span class='add'>are</span> under persecution: we labour, <span class='add'>and</span> have no rest.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_6">6&#160;</span> We have given the hand <span class='add'>to</span> the Egyptians, <span class='add'>and to</span> the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Our fathers have sinned, <span class='add'>and are</span> not; and we have borne their iniquities.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_8">8&#160;</span> Servants have ruled over us: <span class='add'>there is</span> none that doth deliver <span class='add'>us</span> out of their hand.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_9">9&#160;</span> We gat our bread with <span class='add'>the peril of</span> our lives because of the sword of the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_10">10&#160;</span> Our <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>skin was black like an oven because of the <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>terrible famine.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_11">11&#160;</span> They ravished the women in Zion, <span class='add'>and</span> the maids in the cities of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_12">12&#160;</span> Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not honoured.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_13">13&#160;</span> They took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the wood.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_14">14&#160;</span> The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their musick.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_15">15&#160;</span> The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> The crown is fallen <span class='add'>from</span> our head: woe unto us, that we have sinned!</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM5_17">17&#160;</span> For this our heart is faint; for these <span class='add'>things</span> our eyes are dim.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_18">18&#160;</span> Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes walk upon it.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_19">19&#160;</span> Thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>remainest for ever; thy throne from generation to generation.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_20">20&#160;</span> Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, <span class='add'>and</span> forsake us <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>so long time?
<span class="verse" id="LM5_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Turn thou us unto thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old.
<span class="verse" id="LM5_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.</div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR13_17'>13. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_3'>7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the greatness of servitude.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 28 <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_13'>13</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_43'>43</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_44'>44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR52_28'>52. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is become a removing, or, wandering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, desirable.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_3'>23. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to make the soul to come again.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, It is nothing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. pass by the way?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the winepress of the virgin, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR13_17'>13. 17</a> &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_17'>14. 17</a>. ch. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_18'>2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb bring back.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_7'>9 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS16_11'>16 11</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_36'>48. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, proclaimed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb made to touch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all the desirable of the eye.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS80_12'>80. 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS89_40'>89. 40</a> Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_5'>5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hedge.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shut up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. swallowing up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_9'>74. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, faint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_8'>2 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_31'>5. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_14'>14. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_16'>23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the way.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS48_2'>48. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_16'>26. 16</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_17'>14. 17</a> ch. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM1_16'>1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, swaddled with their hands?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR20_7'>20. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bitternesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, rolled me in the ashes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Remember.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bowed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make to return to my heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_5'>16 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_26'>73. 26</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_57'>119 57</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_16'>10. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from his heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_35"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a superior,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_36"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, seeth not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_9'>33. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM3_6'>3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_39"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, murmur.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.45</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C14_13'>4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_17'>24. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_51"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_51"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, more than all.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_65"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.65</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, obstinacy of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_66"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.66</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS8_3'>8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sea calves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_25'>19. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. darker than blackness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb flow out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_57'>28 57</a>. 2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K26_29'>6 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_31'>5. 31</a> &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_21'>23. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in that they could not but touch.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ye polluted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, face.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Thine iniquity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, carry thee captive for thy sins.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cometh for price.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. On our necks are we persecuted.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_29'>31. 29</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_2'>18. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_83'>119. 83</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, terrors, or, storms.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The crown of our head is fallen</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_7'>9. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS29_10'>29. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_12'>102. 12</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_13'>145 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for length of days?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_18'>31. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, For wilt thou utterly reject us?</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
