<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Malachi 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Malachi</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML4_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='ML0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Malachi  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="ML1_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Israel <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Malachi.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_2">2&#160;</span> I have loved you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? <span class='add'>Was</span> not Esau Jacob’s brother? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: yet I <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>loved Jacob,
<span class="verse" id="ML1_3">3&#160;</span> And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_4">4&#160;</span> Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and, The people against whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath indignation for ever.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_5">5&#160;</span> And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will be magnified <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the border of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ A son honoureth <span class='add'>his</span> father, and a servant his master: if then I <span class='add'>be</span> a father, where <span class='add'>is</span> mine honour? and if I <span class='add'>be</span> a master, where <span class='add'>is</span> my fear? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name?
<span class="verse" id="ML1_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> contemptible.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_8">8&#160;</span> And if ye offer the blind <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for sacrifice, <span class='add'>is it</span> not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, <span class='add'>is it</span> not evil? offer it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_9">9&#160;</span> And now, I pray you, beseech <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>God that he will be gracious unto us: this hath been <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_10">10&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is there</span> even among you that would shut the doors <span class='add'>for nought?</span> neither do ye kindle <span class='add'>fire</span> on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure in you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, neither will I accept an <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>offering at your hand.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_11">11&#160;</span> For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name <span class='add'>shall be</span> great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense <span class='add'>shall be</span> offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name <span class='add'>shall be</span> great among the heathen, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> polluted; and the fruit thereof, <span class='add'>even</span> his meat, <span class='add'>is</span> contemptible.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_13">13&#160;</span> Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness <span class='add'>is it!</span> <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and ye have snuffed at it, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; and ye brought <span class='add'>that which was</span> torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ML1_14">14&#160;</span> But cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the deceiver, <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I <span class='add'>am</span> a great King, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and my name <span class='add'>is</span> dreadful among the heathen.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_1">1&#160;</span> And now, O ye priests, this commandment <span class='add'>is</span> for you.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay <span class='add'>it</span> to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay <span class='add'>it</span> to heart.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_3">3&#160;</span> Behold, I will <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>corrupt your seed, and <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>spread dung upon your faces, <span class='add'>even</span> the dung of your solemn feasts; and <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>one</span> shall take you away with it.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_4">4&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_5">5&#160;</span> My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him <span class='add'>for</span> the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_6">6&#160;</span> The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_7">7&#160;</span> For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he <span class='add'>is</span> the messenger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_8">8&#160;</span> But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stumble at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have been partial in the law.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_12">12&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will cut off the man that doeth this, <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_13">13&#160;</span> And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth <span class='add'>it</span> with good will at your hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet <span class='add'>is</span> she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_15">15&#160;</span> And did not he make one? Yet had he the <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he might seek <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>treacherously against the wife of his youth.
<span class="verse" id="ML2_16">16&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, saith <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that he hateth <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>putting away: for <span class='add'>one</span> covereth violence with his garment, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Ye have wearied the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied <span class='add'>him?</span> When ye say, Every one that doeth evil <span class='add'>is</span> good in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he delighteth in them; or, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the God of judgment?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_1">1&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_2">2&#160;</span> But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he <span class='add'>is</span> like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap:
<span class="verse" id="ML3_3">3&#160;</span> And he shall sit <span class='add'>as</span> a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> an offering in righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_4">4&#160;</span> Then shall the <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as in the days of old, and as in <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>former years.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_5">5&#160;</span> And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oppress the hireling in <span class='add'>his</span> wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger <span class='add'>from his right</span>, and fear not me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_6">6&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept <span class='add'>them</span>. <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we return? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_9">9&#160;</span>Ye <span class='add'>are</span> cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, <span class='add'>even</span> this whole nation.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_10">10&#160;</span> Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, if I will not open you the <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>windows of heaven, and <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pour you out a blessing, that <span class='add'>there shall</span> not <span class='add'>be room</span> enough <span class='add'>to receive it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_11">11&#160;</span> And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_12">12&#160;</span> And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Your words have been <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stout against me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Yet ye say, What have we spoken <span class='add'>so much</span> against thee?
<span class="verse" id="ML3_14">14&#160;</span> Ye have said, It <span class='add'>is</span> vain to serve God: and what profit <span class='add'>is it</span> that we have kept <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his ordinance, and that we have walked <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mournfully before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts?
<span class="verse" id="ML3_15">15&#160;</span> And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are set up; yea, <span class='add'>they that</span> <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tempt God are even delivered.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then they that feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake often one to another: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened, and heard <span class='add'>it</span>, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and that thought upon his name.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_17">17&#160;</span> And they shall be mine, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, in that day when I make up my <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.
<span class="verse" id="ML3_18">18&#160;</span> Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_1">1&#160;</span> For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_2">2&#160;</span>¶ But unto you that fear my name shall the <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall.
<span class="verse" id="ML4_3">3&#160;</span> And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do <span class='add'>this</span>, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Remember ye the <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, <span class='add'>with</span> the statutes and judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Behold, I will send you <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="ML4_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of Malachi.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Bring unto, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to sacrifice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the face of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from your hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_11'>1 11</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_20'>6. 20</a> Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_21'>5. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, where as ye might have blown it away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in whose flock is.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_14'>26. 14</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_15'>28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reprove.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. scatter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, it shall take you away to it,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, fall in the law.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lifted up the face against.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. accepted faces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP4_6'>4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ought to love.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or him that waketh, and him that answereth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, excellency.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a seed of God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, unfaithfully.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, if he hate her, put her away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to put away.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_10'>11. 10</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_2'>1. 2</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_76'>1. 76</a>. &amp;c <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK7_27'>7. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 offerings]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ancient.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, defraud.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_11'>7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. empty out.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. corrupt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_14'>21. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his observation</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in black</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are built</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS95_9'>95. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, special treasure.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML4_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_78'>1. 78</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML4_2"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits ye]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML4_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_3'>20. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML4_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_14'>11 14</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_11'>9. 11</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
