<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Matthew 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Matthew</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT28_0'>28</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='MT0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="MT1_1">1&#160;</span> The book of the <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Abraham begat Isaac; and <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Isaac begat Jacob; and <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jacob begat Judas and his brethren;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_3">3&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_4">4&#160;</span> And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naasson; and Naasson begat Salmon;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_5">5&#160;</span> And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_6">6&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesse begat David the king; and <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>David the king begat Solomon of her <span class='add'>that had been the wife</span> of Urias;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_8">8&#160;</span> And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Ozias;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_9">9&#160;</span> And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_11">11&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon:
<span class="verse" id="MT1_12">12&#160;</span> And after they were brought to Babylon, <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_13">13&#160;</span> And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_14">14&#160;</span> And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_15">15&#160;</span> And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan begat Jacob;
<span class="verse" id="MT1_16">16&#160;</span> And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_17">17&#160;</span> So all the generations from Abraham to David <span class='add'>are</span> fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon <span class='add'>are</span> fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ <span class='add'>are</span> fourteen generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Now the <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_19">19&#160;</span> Then Joseph her husband, being a just <span class='add'>man</span>, and not willing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_20">20&#160;</span> But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS: for he shall save his people from their sins.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_22">22&#160;</span> Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT1_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.
<span class="verse" id="MT1_24">24&#160;</span> Then Joseph being raised from sleep did as the angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife:
<span class="verse" id="MT1_25">25&#160;</span> And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name JESUS.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_1">1&#160;</span> Now when <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,
<span class="verse" id="MT2_2">2&#160;</span> Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_3">3&#160;</span> When Herod the king had heard <span class='add'>these things</span>, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_4">4&#160;</span> And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_5">5&#160;</span> And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judaea: for thus it is written by the prophet,
<span class="verse" id="MT2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And thou Bethlehem, <span class='add'>in</span> the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rule my people Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_7">7&#160;</span> Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the star appeared.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_8">8&#160;</span> And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found <span class='add'>him</span>, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_9">9&#160;</span> When they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_10">10&#160;</span> When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_12">12&#160;</span> And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_13">13&#160;</span> And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_14">14&#160;</span> When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt:
<span class="verse" id="MT2_15">15&#160;</span> And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Out of Egypt have I called my son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_17">17&#160;</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jeremy the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT2_18">18&#160;</span> In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping <span class='add'>for</span> her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_19">19&#160;</span>¶ But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
<span class="verse" id="MT2_20">20&#160;</span> Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young child’s life.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_21">21&#160;</span> And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT2_22">22&#160;</span> But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee:
<span class="verse" id="MT2_23">23&#160;</span> And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_1">1&#160;</span> In those days came <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judaea,
<span class="verse" id="MT3_2">2&#160;</span> And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_3">3&#160;</span> For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_4">4&#160;</span> And the same John had his raiment of camel’s hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_5">5&#160;</span> Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the region round about Jordan,
<span class="verse" id="MT3_6">6&#160;</span> And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto them, <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
<span class="verse" id="MT3_8">8&#160;</span> Bring forth therefore fruits <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>meet for repentance:
<span class="verse" id="MT3_9">9&#160;</span> And think not to say within yourselves, <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>We have Abraham to <span class='add'>our</span> father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_10">10&#160;</span> And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>therefore every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and <span class='add'>with</span> fire:
<span class="verse" id="MT3_12">12&#160;</span> Whose fan <span class='add'>is</span> in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_14">14&#160;</span> But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?
<span class="verse" id="MT3_15">15&#160;</span> And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer <span class='add'> it to be so</span> now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. Then he suffered him.
<span class="verse" id="MT3_16">16&#160;</span> And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him:
<span class="verse" id="MT3_17">17&#160;</span> And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_1">1&#160;</span> Then was <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_2">2&#160;</span> And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungred.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_3">3&#160;</span> And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_4">4&#160;</span> But he answered and said, It is written, <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_5">5&#160;</span> Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and setteth him on a pinnacle of the temple,
<span class="verse" id="MT4_6">6&#160;</span> And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is written, <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He shall give his angels charge concerning thee: and in <span class='add'>their</span> hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_7">7&#160;</span> Jesus said unto him, It is written again, <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_8">8&#160;</span> Again, the devil taketh him up into an exceeding high mountain, and sheweth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them;
<span class="verse" id="MT4_9">9&#160;</span> And saith unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_10">10&#160;</span> Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_11">11&#160;</span> Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now when Jesus had heard that John was <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cast into prison, he departed into Galilee;
<span class="verse" id="MT4_13">13&#160;</span> And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim:
<span class="verse" id="MT4_14">14&#160;</span> That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT4_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, <span class='add'>by</span> the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles;
<span class="verse" id="MT4_16">16&#160;</span> The people which sat in darkness saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_18">18&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_19">19&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_20">20&#160;</span> And they straightway left <span class='add'>their</span> nets, and followed him.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_21">21&#160;</span> And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James <span class='add'>the son</span> of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_22">22&#160;</span> And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of disease among the people.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_24">24&#160;</span> And his fame went throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those which were possessed with devils, and those which were lunatick, and those that had the palsy; and he healed them.
<span class="verse" id="MT4_25">25&#160;</span> And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee, and <span class='add'>from</span> Decapolis, and <span class='add'>from</span> Jerusalem, and <span class='add'>from</span> Judaea, and <span class='add'>from</span> beyond Jordan.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_1">1&#160;</span> And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_2">2&#160;</span> And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT5_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_4">4&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_6">6&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for they shall be filled.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_7">7&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_9">9&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_11">11&#160;</span> Blessed are ye, when <span class='add'>men</span> shall revile you, and persecute <span class='add'>you</span>, and shall say all manner of <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evil against you <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>falsely, for my sake.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_12">12&#160;</span> Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great <span class='add'>is</span> your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Ye are the salt of the earth: <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_14">14&#160;</span> Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_15">15&#160;</span> Neither do men <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>light a candle, and put it under <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in the house.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_16">16&#160;</span> Let your light so shine before men, <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_18">18&#160;</span> For verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach <span class='add'>them</span>, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_20">20&#160;</span> For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed <span class='add'>the righteousness</span> of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Ye have heard that it was said <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by them of old time, <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_22">22&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee;
<span class="verse" id="MT5_24">24&#160;</span> Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_26">26&#160;</span> Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not commit adultery:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_28">28&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And if thy right eye <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offend thee, pluck it out, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not <span class='add'>that</span> thy whole body should be cast into hell.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_30">30&#160;</span> And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not <span class='add'>that</span> thy whole body should be cast into hell.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_31">31&#160;</span> It hath been said, <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_32">32&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to commit adultery: and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth adultery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time, <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_34">34&#160;</span> But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven; for it is God’s throne:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_35">35&#160;</span> Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_36">36&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_37">37&#160;</span><a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_38">38&#160;</span>¶ Ye have heard that it hath been said, <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth:
<span class="verse" id="MT5_39">39&#160;</span> But I say unto you, <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_40">40&#160;</span> And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have <span class='add'>thy</span> cloke also.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_41">41&#160;</span> And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_42">42&#160;</span> Give to him that asketh thee, and <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_43">43&#160;</span>¶ Ye have heard that it hath been said, <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_44">44&#160;</span> But I say unto you, <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
<span class="verse" id="MT5_45">45&#160;</span> That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.
<span class="verse" id="MT5_46">46&#160;</span><a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?
<span class="verse" id="MT5_47">47&#160;</span> And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more <span class='add'>than others</span>? do not even the publicans so?
<span class="verse" id="MT5_48">48&#160;</span> Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_1">1&#160;</span> Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them: otherwise ye have no reward <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of your Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_2">2&#160;</span> Therefore <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when thou doest <span class='add'>thine</span> alms, <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_3">3&#160;</span> But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>hand doeth:
<span class="verse" id="MT6_4">4&#160;</span> That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret himself shall reward thee openly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites <span class='add'>are</span>: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_6">6&#160;</span> But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_7">7&#160;</span> But when ye pray, use not vain <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>repetitions, as the heathen <span class='add'>do</span>: for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_8">8&#160;</span> Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_9">9&#160;</span> After this manner therefore pray ye: <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_10">10&#160;</span> Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as <span class='add'>it is</span> in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_11">11&#160;</span> Give us this day our daily bread.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_12">12&#160;</span> And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_13">13&#160;</span> And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you:
<span class="verse" id="MT6_15">15&#160;</span> But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_17">17&#160;</span> But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face;
<span class="verse" id="MT6_18">18&#160;</span> That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal:
<span class="verse" id="MT6_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal:
<span class="verse" id="MT6_21">21&#160;</span> For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_23">23&#160;</span> But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great <span class='add'>is</span> that darkness! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_24">24&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore I say unto you, <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment?
<span class="verse" id="MT6_26">26&#160;</span> Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?
<span class="verse" id="MT6_27">27&#160;</span> Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature?
<span class="verse" id="MT6_28">28&#160;</span> And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:
<span class="verse" id="MT6_29">29&#160;</span> And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_30">30&#160;</span> Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven, <span class='add'>shall he</span> not much more <span class='add'>clothe</span> you, O ye of little faith?
<span class="verse" id="MT6_31">31&#160;</span> Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?
<span class="verse" id="MT6_32">32&#160;</span> (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_33">33&#160;</span> But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you.
<span class="verse" id="MT6_34">34&#160;</span> Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day <span class='add'>is</span> the evil thereof. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_1">1&#160;</span> Judge <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>not, that ye be not judged.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_2">2&#160;</span> For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother’s eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_4">4&#160;</span> Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam <span class='add'>is</span> in thine own eye?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_5">5&#160;</span> Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother’s eye. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you:
<span class="verse" id="MT7_8">8&#160;</span> For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_9">9&#160;</span> Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_10">10&#160;</span> Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_11">11&#160;</span> If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore all things <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide <span class='add'>is</span> the gate, and broad <span class='add'>is</span> the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:
<span class="verse" id="MT7_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Because strait <span class='add'>is</span> the gate, and narrow <span class='add'>is</span> the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_16">16&#160;</span> Ye shall know them by their fruits. <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_17">17&#160;</span> Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_18">18&#160;</span> A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither <span class='add'>can</span> a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_20">20&#160;</span> Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Not every one that saith unto me, <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_22">22&#160;</span> Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?
<span class="verse" id="MT7_23">23&#160;</span> And then will I profess unto them, <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I never knew you: <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>depart from me, ye that work iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Therefore <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:
<span class="verse" id="MT7_25">25&#160;</span> And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_26">26&#160;</span> And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand:
<span class="verse" id="MT7_27">27&#160;</span> And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it.
<span class="verse" id="MT7_28">28&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the people were astonished at his doctrine:
<span class="verse" id="MT7_29">29&#160;</span> For he taught them as <span class='add'>one</span> having authority, and not as the scribes.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_1">1&#160;</span> When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_3">3&#160;</span> And Jesus put forth <span class='add'>his</span> hand, and touched him, saying, I will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_4">4&#160;</span> And Jesus saith unto him, See thou tell no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift that <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, beseeching him,
<span class="verse" id="MT8_6">6&#160;</span> And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_7">7&#160;</span> And Jesus saith unto him, I will come and heal him.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_8">8&#160;</span> The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_9">9&#160;</span> For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this <span class='add'>man</span>, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_10">10&#160;</span> When Jesus heard <span class='add'>it</span>, he marvelled, and said to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_11">11&#160;</span> And I say unto you, That many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_12">12&#160;</span> But the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_13">13&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, <span class='add'>so</span> be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when Jesus was come into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s mother laid, and sick of a fever.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_15">15&#160;</span> And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose, and ministered unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with <span class='add'>his</span> word, and healed all that were sick:
<span class="verse" id="MT8_17">17&#160;</span> That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Himself took our infirmities, and bare <span class='add'>our</span> sicknesses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to depart unto the other side.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_20">20&#160;</span> And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air <span class='add'>have</span> nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay <span class='add'>his</span> head.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_21">21&#160;</span> And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_22">22&#160;</span> But Jesus said unto him, Follow me; and let the dead bury their dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was asleep.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_25">25&#160;</span> And his disciples came to <span class='add'>him</span>, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_26">26&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_27">27&#160;</span> But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_28">28&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_29">29&#160;</span> And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?
<span class="verse" id="MT8_30">30&#160;</span> And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine feeding.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_31">31&#160;</span> So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_32">32&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_33">33&#160;</span> And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every thing, and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils.
<span class="verse" id="MT8_34">34&#160;</span> And, behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought <span class='add'>him</span> that he would depart out of their coasts.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_1">1&#160;</span> And he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_3">3&#160;</span> And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This <span class='add'>man</span> blasphemeth.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_4">4&#160;</span> And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?
<span class="verse" id="MT9_5">5&#160;</span> For whether is easier, to say, <span class='add'>Thy</span> sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and walk?
<span class="verse" id="MT9_6">6&#160;</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_7">7&#160;</span> And he arose, and departed to his house.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_8">8&#160;</span> But when the multitudes saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they marvelled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_9">9&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him, Follow me. And he arose, and followed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_11">11&#160;</span> And when the Pharisees saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they said unto his disciples, Why eateth your Master with publicans and sinners?
<span class="verse" id="MT9_12">12&#160;</span> But when Jesus heard <span class='add'>that</span>, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_13">13&#160;</span> But go ye and learn what <span class='add'>that</span> meaneth, <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but sinners to repentance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast not?
<span class="verse" id="MT9_15">15&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_16">16&#160;</span> No man putteth a piece of <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>new cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_17">17&#160;</span> Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_18">18&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_19">19&#160;</span> And Jesus arose, and followed him, and <span class='add'>so did</span> his disciples. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind <span class='add'>him</span>, and touched the hem of his garment:
<span class="verse" id="MT9_21">21&#160;</span> For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_22">22&#160;</span> But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_23">23&#160;</span> And when Jesus came into the ruler’s house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise,
<span class="verse" id="MT9_24">24&#160;</span> He said unto them, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_25">25&#160;</span> But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_26">26&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the fame hereof went abroad into all that land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, <span class='add'>Thou</span> Son of David, have mercy on us.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_28">28&#160;</span> And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_29">29&#160;</span> Then touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_30">30&#160;</span> And their eyes were opened; and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, See <span class='add'>that</span> no man know <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_31">31&#160;</span> But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_32">32&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a devil.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_33">33&#160;</span> And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_34">34&#160;</span> But the Pharisees said, <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He casteth <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>out devils through the prince of the devils.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_36">36&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fainted, and were scattered abroad, <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as sheep having no shepherd.
<span class="verse" id="MT9_37">37&#160;</span> Then saith he unto his disciples, <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The harvest truly <span class='add'>is</span> plenteous, but the labourers <span class='add'>are</span> few;
<span class="verse" id="MT9_38">38&#160;</span> Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth labourers into his harvest. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when he had called unto <span class='add'>him</span> his twelve disciples, he gave them power <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>against</span> unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness and all manner of disease.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_2">2&#160;</span> Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James <span class='add'>the son</span> of Zebedee, and John his brother;
<span class="verse" id="MT10_3">3&#160;</span> Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James <span class='add'>the son</span> of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus;
<span class="verse" id="MT10_4">4&#160;</span> Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_5">5&#160;</span> These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into <span class='add'>any</span> city of the Samaritans enter ye not:
<span class="verse" id="MT10_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_7">7&#160;</span> And as ye go, preach, saying, <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The kingdom of heaven is at hand.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_8">8&#160;</span> Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, freely give.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses,
<span class="verse" id="MT10_10">10&#160;</span> Nor scrip for <span class='add'>your</span> journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for the workman is worthy of his meat.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye go thence.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_12">12&#160;</span> And when ye come into an house, salute it.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_13">13&#160;</span> And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shake off the dust of your feet.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_15">15&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>harmless as doves.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_17">17&#160;</span> But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues;
<span class="verse" id="MT10_18">18&#160;</span> And ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_20">20&#160;</span> For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shall rise up against <span class='add'>their</span> parents, and cause them to be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_22">22&#160;</span> And ye shall be hated of all <span class='add'>men</span> for my name’s sake: <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but he that endureth to the end shall be saved.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_23">23&#160;</span> But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The disciple is not above <span class='add'>his</span> master, nor the servant above his lord.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_25">25&#160;</span> It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more <span class='add'>shall they call</span> them of his household?
<span class="verse" id="MT10_26">26&#160;</span> Fear them not therefore: <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_27">27&#160;</span> What I tell you in darkness, <span class='add'>that</span> speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, <span class='add'>that</span> preach ye upon the housetops.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_29">29&#160;</span> Are not two sparrows sold for a <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_31">31&#160;</span> Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_35">35&#160;</span> For I am come to set a man at variance <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_36">36&#160;</span> And a man’s foes <span class='add'>shall be</span> they of his own household.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_37">37&#160;</span><a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy of me.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_39">39&#160;</span><a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that findeth his life shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_40">40&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_41">41&#160;</span> He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s reward.
<span class="verse" id="MT10_42">42&#160;</span><a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold <span class='add'>water</span> only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples,
<span class="verse" id="MT11_3">3&#160;</span> And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?
<span class="verse" id="MT11_4">4&#160;</span> Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and see:
<span class="verse" id="MT11_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the poor have the gospel preached to them.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_6">6&#160;</span> And blessed is <span class='add'>he</span>, whosoever shall not be offended in me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
<span class="verse" id="MT11_8">8&#160;</span> But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft <span class='add'>clothing</span> are in kings’ houses.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_9">9&#160;</span> But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_10">10&#160;</span> For this is <span class='add'>he</span>, of whom it is written, <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_11">11&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_13">13&#160;</span> For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_14">14&#160;</span> And if ye will receive <span class='add'>it</span>, this is <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Elias, which was for to come.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_15">15&#160;</span> He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows,
<span class="verse" id="MT11_17">17&#160;</span> And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_18">18&#160;</span> For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_19">19&#160;</span> The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified of her children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not:
<span class="verse" id="MT11_21">21&#160;</span> Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_22">22&#160;</span> But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_23">23&#160;</span> And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works, which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_24">24&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_25">25&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_26">26&#160;</span> Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and <span class='add'>he</span> to whomsoever the Son will reveal <span class='add'>him.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Come unto me, all <span class='add'>ye</span> that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_29">29&#160;</span> Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
<span class="verse" id="MT11_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For my yoke <span class='add'>is</span> easy, and my burden is light. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_1">1&#160;</span> At that time <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn; and his disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_2">2&#160;</span> But when the Pharisees saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_3">3&#160;</span> But he said unto them, Have ye not read <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>what David did, when he was an hungred, and they that were with him;
<span class="verse" id="MT12_4">4&#160;</span> How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but only for the priests?
<span class="verse" id="MT12_5">5&#160;</span> Or have ye not read in the <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>law, how that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are blameless?
<span class="verse" id="MT12_6">6&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That in this place is <span class='add'>one</span> greater than the temple.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_7">7&#160;</span> But if ye had known what <span class='add'>this</span> meaneth, <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_8">8&#160;</span> For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, there was a man which had <span class='add'>his</span> hand withered. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might accuse him.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_11">11&#160;</span> And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on it, and lift <span class='add'>it</span> out?
<span class="verse" id="MT12_12">12&#160;</span> How much then is a man better than a sheep? Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_13">13&#160;</span> Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched <span class='add'>it</span> forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then the Pharisees went out, and <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>held a council against him, how they might destroy him.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_15">15&#160;</span> But when Jesus knew <span class='add'>it</span>, he withdrew himself from thence: and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all;
<span class="verse" id="MT12_16">16&#160;</span> And charged them that they should not make him known:
<span class="verse" id="MT12_17">17&#160;</span> That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT12_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_19">19&#160;</span> He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_20">20&#160;</span> A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_21">21&#160;</span> And in his name shall the Gentiles trust. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind, and dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_23">23&#160;</span> And all the people were amazed, and said, <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Is not this the son of David?
<span class="verse" id="MT12_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But when the Pharisees heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they said, This <span class='add'>fellow</span> doth not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub the prince of the devils.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_25">25&#160;</span> And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand:
<span class="verse" id="MT12_26">26&#160;</span> And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand?
<span class="verse" id="MT12_27">27&#160;</span> And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast <span class='add'>them</span> out? therefore they shall be your judges.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_28">28&#160;</span> But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_29">29&#160;</span> Or else how can one enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will spoil his house.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_30">30&#160;</span> He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore I say unto you, <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy <span class='add'>against</span> the <span class='add'>Holy</span> Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_32">32&#160;</span> And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the <span class='add'>world</span> to come.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_33">33&#160;</span> Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by <span class='add'>his</span> fruit.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_34">34&#160;</span> O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_35">35&#160;</span> A good man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_36">36&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_37">37&#160;</span> For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_38">38&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master, we would see a sign from thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_39">39&#160;</span> But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas:
<span class="verse" id="MT12_40">40&#160;</span><a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale’s belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_41">41&#160;</span> The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas <span class='add'>is</span> here.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_42">42&#160;</span><a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon <span class='add'>is</span> here.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_44">44&#160;</span> Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth <span class='add'>it</span> empty, swept, and garnished.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_45">45&#160;</span> Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and the last <span class='add'>state</span> of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_46">46&#160;</span>¶ While he yet talked to the people, <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>behold, <span class='add'>his</span> mother and his brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_47">47&#160;</span> Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT12_48">48&#160;</span> But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?
<span class="verse" id="MT12_49">49&#160;</span> And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren!
<span class="verse" id="MT12_50">50&#160;</span> For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_1">1&#160;</span> The same day went Jesus out of the house, <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and sat by the sea side.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_2">2&#160;</span> And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_3">3&#160;</span> And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, a sower went forth to sow;
<span class="verse" id="MT13_4">4&#160;</span> And when he sowed, some <span class='add'>seeds</span> fell by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_5">5&#160;</span> Some fell upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no deepness of earth:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_6">6&#160;</span> And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>had no root, they withered away.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_7">7&#160;</span> And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_8">8&#160;</span> But other fell into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_9">9&#160;</span> Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_10">10&#160;</span> And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables?
<span class="verse" id="MT13_11">11&#160;</span> He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_14">14&#160;</span> And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_15">15&#160;</span> For this people’s heart is waxed gross, and <span class='add'>their</span> ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with <span class='add'>their</span> eyes, and hear with <span class='add'>their</span> ears, and should understand with <span class='add'>their</span> heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_16">16&#160;</span> But blessed <span class='add'>are</span> your eyes, for they see: and your ears, for they hear.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_17">17&#160;</span> For verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>That many prophets and righteous <span class='add'>men</span> have desired to see <span class='add'>those things</span> which ye see, and have not seen <span class='add'>them</span>; and to hear <span class='add'>those things</span> which ye hear, and have not heard <span class='add'>them.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_19">19&#160;</span> When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth <span class='add'>it</span> not, then cometh the wicked <span class='add'>one</span>, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. This is he which received seed by the way side.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_20">20&#160;</span> But he that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it;
<span class="verse" id="MT13_21">21&#160;</span> Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_22">22&#160;</span> He also that received seed among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_23">23&#160;</span> But he that received seed into the good ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth <span class='add'>it</span>; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_25">25&#160;</span> But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_26">26&#160;</span> But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_27">27&#160;</span> So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it tares?
<span class="verse" id="MT13_28">28&#160;</span> He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
<span class="verse" id="MT13_29">29&#160;</span> But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_30">30&#160;</span> Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_32">32&#160;</span> Which indeed is the least of all seeds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_33">33&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without a parable spake he not unto them:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_35">35&#160;</span> That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_36">36&#160;</span> Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_37">37&#160;</span> He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man;
<span class="verse" id="MT13_38">38&#160;</span> The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked <span class='add'>one</span>;
<span class="verse" id="MT13_39">39&#160;</span> The enemy that sowed them is the devil; <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_40">40&#160;</span> As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_41">41&#160;</span> The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>things that offend, and them which do iniquity;
<span class="verse" id="MT13_42">42&#160;</span> And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_44">44&#160;</span>¶ Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_45">45&#160;</span>¶ Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_46">46&#160;</span> Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>went and sold all that he had, and bought it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_47">47&#160;</span>¶ Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind:
<span class="verse" id="MT13_48">48&#160;</span> Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_49">49&#160;</span> So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just,
<span class="verse" id="MT13_50">50&#160;</span> And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_51">51&#160;</span> Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_52">52&#160;</span> Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe <span class='add'>which is</span> instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man <span class='add'>that is</span> an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure <span class='add'>things</span> new and old. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_53">53&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed thence.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this <span class='add'>man</span> this wisdom, and <span class='add'>these</span> mighty works?
<span class="verse" id="MT13_55">55&#160;</span><a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Is not this the carpenter’s son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?
<span class="verse" id="MT13_56">56&#160;</span> And his sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then hath this <span class='add'>man</span> all these things?
<span class="verse" id="MT13_57">57&#160;</span> And they were offended in him. But Jesus said unto them, <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own house.
<span class="verse" id="MT13_58">58&#160;</span> And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_1">1&#160;</span> At that time <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus,
<span class="verse" id="MT14_2">2&#160;</span> And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>do shew forth themselves in him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_3">3&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put <span class='add'>him</span> in prison for Herodias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_4">4&#160;</span> For John said unto him, <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>It is not lawful for thee to have her.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_5">5&#160;</span> And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>because they counted him as a prophet.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_6">6&#160;</span> But when Herod’s birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_7">7&#160;</span> Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_8">8&#160;</span> And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John Baptist’s head in a charger.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_9">9&#160;</span> And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oath’s sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he commanded <span class='add'>it</span> to be given <span class='add'>her</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_10">10&#160;</span> And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_11">11&#160;</span> And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel: and she brought <span class='add'>it</span> to her mother.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_12">12&#160;</span> And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When Jesus heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart: and when the people had heard <span class='add'>thereof</span>, they followed him on foot out of the cities.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_14">14&#160;</span> And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_15">15&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves victuals.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_16">16&#160;</span> But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart; give ye them to eat.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_17">17&#160;</span> And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_18">18&#160;</span> He said, Bring them hither to me.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_19">19&#160;</span> And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave the loaves to <span class='add'>his</span> disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_20">20&#160;</span> And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_21">21&#160;</span> And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside women and children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray: <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and when the evening was come, he was there alone.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_24">24&#160;</span> But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_25">25&#160;</span> And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_26">26&#160;</span> And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_27">27&#160;</span> But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_28">28&#160;</span> And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_29">29&#160;</span> And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_30">30&#160;</span> But when he saw the wind <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_31">31&#160;</span> And immediately Jesus stretched forth <span class='add'>his</span> hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?
<span class="verse" id="MT14_32">32&#160;</span> And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_33">33&#160;</span> Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_34">34&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Gennesaret.
<span class="verse" id="MT14_35">35&#160;</span> And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased;
<span class="verse" id="MT14_36">36&#160;</span> And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment: and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_1">1&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT15_2">2&#160;</span> Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_3">3&#160;</span> But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition?
<span class="verse" id="MT15_4">4&#160;</span> For God commanded, saying, <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Honour thy father and mother: and, <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_5">5&#160;</span> But ye say, Whosoever shall say to <span class='add'>his</span> father or <span class='add'>his</span> mother, <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>It is</span> a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me;
<span class="verse" id="MT15_6">6&#160;</span> And honour not his father or his mother, <span class='add'>he shall be free</span>. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your tradition.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Ye</span> hypocrites, well did Esaias prophesy of you, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT15_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with <span class='add'>their</span> lips; but their heart is far from me.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_9">9&#160;</span> But in vain they do worship me, teaching <span class='add'>for</span> doctrines the commandments of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand:
<span class="verse" id="MT15_11">11&#160;</span> Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_12">12&#160;</span> Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended, after they heard this saying?
<span class="verse" id="MT15_13">13&#160;</span> But he answered and said, <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_14">14&#160;</span> Let them alone: <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_16">16&#160;</span> And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding?
<span class="verse" id="MT15_17">17&#160;</span> Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught?
<span class="verse" id="MT15_18">18&#160;</span> But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies:
<span class="verse" id="MT15_20">20&#160;</span> These are <span class='add'>the things</span> which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_21">21&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_22">22&#160;</span> And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, <span class='add'>thou</span> Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_23">23&#160;</span> But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_24">24&#160;</span> But he answered and said, <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_25">25&#160;</span> Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_26">26&#160;</span> But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast <span class='add'>it</span> to dogs.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_27">27&#160;</span> And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_28">28&#160;</span> Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great <span class='add'>is</span> thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee; and went up into a mountain, and sat down there.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And great multitudes came unto him, having with them <span class='add'>those that were</span> lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus’ feet; and he healed them:
<span class="verse" id="MT15_31">31&#160;</span> Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_32">32&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then Jesus called his disciples <span class='add'>unto him</span>, and said, I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_33">33&#160;</span> And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude?
<span class="verse" id="MT15_34">34&#160;</span> And Jesus saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few little fishes.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_35">35&#160;</span> And he commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_36">36&#160;</span> And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake <span class='add'>them</span>, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_37">37&#160;</span> And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken <span class='add'>meat</span> that was left seven baskets full.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_38">38&#160;</span> And they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and children.
<span class="verse" id="MT15_39">39&#160;</span> And he sent away the multitude, and took ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_1">1&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Pharisees also with the Sadducees came, and tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_2">2&#160;</span> He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, <span class='add'>It will be</span> fair weather: for the sky is red.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_3">3&#160;</span> And in the morning, <span class='add'>It will be</span> foul weather to day: for the sky is red and lowring. O <span class='add'>ye</span> hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not <span class='add'>discern</span> the signs of the times?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_4">4&#160;</span> A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_5">5&#160;</span> And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to take bread. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_7">7&#160;</span> And they reasoned among themselves, saying, <span class='add'>It is</span> because we have taken no bread.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Which</span> when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_11">11&#160;</span> How is it that ye do not understand that I spake <span class='add'>it</span> not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_12">12&#160;</span> Then understood they how that he bade <span class='add'>them</span> not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_13">13&#160;</span>¶ When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, <a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_14">14&#160;</span> And they said, Some <span class='add'>say that thou art</span> John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_15">15&#160;</span> He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_16">16&#160;</span> And Simon Peter answered and said, <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_17">17&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed <span class='add'>it</span> unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_18">18&#160;</span> And I say also unto thee, That <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_20">20&#160;</span> Then charged he his disciples that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_21">21&#160;</span>¶ From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_22">22&#160;</span> Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_23">23&#160;</span> But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan: thou art an offence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_24">24&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any <span class='add'>man</span> will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_25">25&#160;</span> For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_26">26&#160;</span> For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
<span class="verse" id="MT16_27">27&#160;</span> For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and then he shall reward every man according to his works.
<span class="verse" id="MT16_28">28&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart,
<span class="verse" id="MT17_2">2&#160;</span> And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_3">3&#160;</span> And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_4">4&#160;</span> Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_6">6&#160;</span> And when the disciples heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_7">7&#160;</span> And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_8">8&#160;</span> And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_9">9&#160;</span> And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_10">10&#160;</span> And his disciples asked him, saying, <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come?
<span class="verse" id="MT17_11">11&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_12">12&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_13">13&#160;</span> Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a <span class='add'>certain</span> man, kneeling down to him, and saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT17_15">15&#160;</span> Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_16">16&#160;</span> And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_17">17&#160;</span> Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_18">18&#160;</span> And Jesus rebuked the devil; and he departed out of him: and the child was cured from that very hour.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_19">19&#160;</span> Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out?
<span class="verse" id="MT17_20">20&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_21">21&#160;</span> Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of men:
<span class="verse" id="MT17_23">23&#160;</span> And they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>tribute <span class='add'>money</span> came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay tribute?
<span class="verse" id="MT17_25">25&#160;</span> He saith, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers?
<span class="verse" id="MT17_26">26&#160;</span> Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the children free.
<span class="verse" id="MT17_27">27&#160;</span> Notwithstanding, lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_1">1&#160;</span> At <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
<span class="verse" id="MT18_2">2&#160;</span> And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,
<span class="verse" id="MT18_3">3&#160;</span> And said, Verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_4">4&#160;</span> Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_5">5&#160;</span> And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and <span class='add'>that</span> he were drowned in the depth of the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!
<span class="verse" id="MT18_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast <span class='add'>them</span> from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_9">9&#160;</span> And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_10">10&#160;</span> Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> How think ye? if a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is gone astray?
<span class="verse" id="MT18_13">13&#160;</span> And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that <span class='add'>sheep</span>, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_14">14&#160;</span> Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Moreover <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_16">16&#160;</span> But if he will not hear <span class='add'>thee, then</span> take with thee one or two more, that in <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_17">17&#160;</span> And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell <span class='add'>it</span> unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heathen man and a publican.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_18">18&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_19">19&#160;</span> Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_20">20&#160;</span> For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>till seven times?
<span class="verse" id="MT18_22">22&#160;</span> Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take account of his servants.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_24">24&#160;</span> And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>talents.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_25">25&#160;</span> But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_26">26&#160;</span> The servant therefore fell down, and <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_27">27&#160;</span> Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_28">28&#160;</span> But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_29">29&#160;</span> And his fellowservant fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_30">30&#160;</span> And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_31">31&#160;</span> So when his fellowservants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_32">32&#160;</span> Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me:
<span class="verse" id="MT18_33">33&#160;</span> Shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy fellowservant, even as I had pity on thee?
<span class="verse" id="MT18_34">34&#160;</span> And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.
<span class="verse" id="MT18_35">35&#160;</span> So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>that</span> when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan;
<span class="verse" id="MT19_2">2&#160;</span> And great multitudes followed him; and he healed them there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_3">3&#160;</span>¶ The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_4">4&#160;</span> And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that he which made <span class='add'>them</span> at the beginning made them male and female,
<span class="verse" id="MT19_5">5&#160;</span> And said, <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they twain shall be one flesh?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_7">7&#160;</span> They say unto him, <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_8">8&#160;</span> He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except <span class='add'>it be</span> for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_10">10&#160;</span>¶ His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with <span class='add'>his</span> wife, it is not good to marry.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_11">11&#160;</span> But he said unto them, All <span class='add'>men</span> cannot receive this saying, save <span class='add'>they</span> to whom it is given.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_12">12&#160;</span> For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from <span class='add'>their</span> mother’s womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive <span class='add'>it</span>, let him receive <span class='add'>it.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then were there brought unto him little children, that he should put <span class='add'>his</span> hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_14">14&#160;</span> But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_15">15&#160;</span> And he laid <span class='add'>his</span> hands on them, and departed thence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And, behold, one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_17">17&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Why callest thou me good? <span class='add'>there is</span> none good but one, <span class='add'>that is</span>, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_18">18&#160;</span> He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness,
<span class="verse" id="MT19_19">19&#160;</span> Honour thy father and <span class='add'>thy</span> mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_20">20&#160;</span> The young man saith unto him, All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_21">21&#160;</span> Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go <span class='add'>and</span> sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come <span class='add'>and</span> follow me.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_22">22&#160;</span> But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_24">24&#160;</span> And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_25">25&#160;</span> When his disciples heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_26">26&#160;</span> But Jesus beheld <span class='add'>them</span>, and said unto them, With men this is impossible; but with God all things are possible. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_27">27&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?
<span class="verse" id="MT19_28">28&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_29">29&#160;</span> And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.
<span class="verse" id="MT19_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But many <span class='add'>that are</span> first shall be last; and the last <span class='add'>shall be</span> first. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_1">1&#160;</span> For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man <span class='add'>that is</span> an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_2">2&#160;</span> And when he had agreed with the labourers for a <a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_3">3&#160;</span> And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace,
<span class="verse" id="MT20_4">4&#160;</span> And said unto them; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I will give you. And they went their way.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_5">5&#160;</span> Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_6">6&#160;</span> And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here all the day idle?
<span class="verse" id="MT20_7">7&#160;</span> They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, <span class='add'>that</span> shall ye receive.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_8">8&#160;</span> So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the labourers, and give them <span class='add'>their</span> hire, beginning from the last unto the first.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_9">9&#160;</span> And when they came that <span class='add'>were hired</span> about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_10">10&#160;</span> But when the first came, they supposed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_11">11&#160;</span> And when they had received <span class='add'>it</span>, they murmured against the goodman of the house,
<span class="verse" id="MT20_12">12&#160;</span> Saying, These last <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have wrought <span class='add'>but</span> one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_13">13&#160;</span> But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst not thou agree with me for a penny?
<span class="verse" id="MT20_14">14&#160;</span> Take <span class='add'>that</span> thine <span class='add'>is</span>, and go thy way: I will give unto this last, even as unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_15">15&#160;</span> Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?
<span class="verse" id="MT20_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> So the last shall be first, and the first last: for many be called, but few chosen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them,
<span class="verse" id="MT20_18">18&#160;</span> Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
<span class="verse" id="MT20_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify <span class='add'>him</span>: and the third day he shall rise again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then came to him the mother of Zebedee’s children with her sons, worshipping <span class='add'>him</span>, and desiring a certain thing of him.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_21">21&#160;</span> And he said unto her, What wilt thou? She saith unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_22">22&#160;</span> But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_23">23&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but <span class='add'>it shall be given to them</span> for whom it is prepared of my Father.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_24">24&#160;</span> And when the ten heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_25">25&#160;</span> But Jesus called them <span class='add'>unto him</span>, and said, <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_26">26&#160;</span> But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister;
<span class="verse" id="MT20_27">27&#160;</span> And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant:
<span class="verse" id="MT20_28">28&#160;</span> Even as the <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, <span class='add'>thou</span> Son of David.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_31">31&#160;</span> And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, <span class='add'>thou</span> Son of David.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_32">32&#160;</span> And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto you?
<span class="verse" id="MT20_33">33&#160;</span> They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
<span class="verse" id="MT20_34">34&#160;</span> So Jesus had compassion <span class='add'>on them</span>, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples,
<span class="verse" id="MT21_2">2&#160;</span> Saying unto them, Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose <span class='add'>them</span>, and bring <span class='add'>them</span> unto me.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_3">3&#160;</span> And if any <span class='add'>man</span> say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and straightway he will send them.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_4">4&#160;</span> All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT21_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them,
<span class="verse" id="MT21_7">7&#160;</span> And brought the ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set <span class='add'>him</span> thereon.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_8">8&#160;</span> And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed <span class='add'>them</span> in the way.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_9">9&#160;</span> And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is this?
<span class="verse" id="MT21_11">11&#160;</span> And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves,
<span class="verse" id="MT21_13">13&#160;</span> And said unto them, It is written, <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My house shall be called the house of prayer; <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but ye have made it a den of thieves.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_14">14&#160;</span> And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_15">15&#160;</span> And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased,
<span class="verse" id="MT21_16">16&#160;</span> And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany; and he lodged there.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_18">18&#160;</span> Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_20">20&#160;</span> And when the disciples saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree withered away!
<span class="verse" id="MT21_21">21&#160;</span> Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this <span class='add'>which is done</span> to the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_22">22&#160;</span> And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_23">23&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?
<span class="verse" id="MT21_24">24&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_25">25&#160;</span> The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him?
<span class="verse" id="MT21_26">26&#160;</span> But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the people; <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for all hold John as a prophet.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_27">27&#160;</span> And they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. And he said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_28">28&#160;</span>¶ But what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_29">29&#160;</span> He answered and said, I will not: but afterward he repented, and went.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_30">30&#160;</span> And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I <span class='add'>go</span>, sir: and went not.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_31">31&#160;</span> Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_32">32&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen <span class='add'>it</span>, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country:
<span class="verse" id="MT21_34">34&#160;</span> And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_35">35&#160;</span> And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_36">36&#160;</span> Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_37">37&#160;</span> But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_38">38&#160;</span> But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_39">39&#160;</span> And they caught him, and cast <span class='add'>him</span> out of the vineyard, and slew <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_40">40&#160;</span> When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen?
<span class="verse" id="MT21_41">41&#160;</span> They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out <span class='add'>his</span> vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_42">42&#160;</span> Jesus saith unto them, <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes?
<span class="verse" id="MT21_43">43&#160;</span> Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_44">44&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_45">45&#160;</span> And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of them.
<span class="verse" id="MT21_46">46&#160;</span> But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_1">1&#160;</span> And Jesus answered <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and spake unto them again by parables, and said,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_2">2&#160;</span> The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_3">3&#160;</span> And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_4">4&#160;</span> Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and <span class='add'>my</span> fatlings <span class='add'>are</span> killed, and all things <span class='add'>are</span> ready: come unto the marriage.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_5">5&#160;</span> But they made light of <span class='add'>it</span>, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise:
<span class="verse" id="MT22_6">6&#160;</span> And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_7">7&#160;</span> But when the king heard <span class='add'>thereof</span>, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_8">8&#160;</span> Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_9">9&#160;</span> Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_10">10&#160;</span> So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment:
<span class="verse" id="MT22_12">12&#160;</span> And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_13">13&#160;</span> Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast <span class='add'>him</span> into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For many are called, but few <span class='add'>are</span> chosen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_15">15&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in <span class='add'>his</span> talk.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_16">16&#160;</span> And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any <span class='add'>man</span>: for thou regardest not the person of men.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_17">17&#160;</span> Tell us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?
<span class="verse" id="MT22_18">18&#160;</span> But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, <span class='add'>ye</span> hypocrites?
<span class="verse" id="MT22_19">19&#160;</span> Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>penny.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_20">20&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Whose <span class='add'>is</span> this image and <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>superscription?
<span class="verse" id="MT22_21">21&#160;</span> They say unto him, Cæsar’s. Then saith he unto them, <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Render therefore unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar’s; and unto God the things that are God’s.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_22">22&#160;</span> When they had heard <span class='add'>these words</span>, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_23">23&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The same day came to him the Sadducees, <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_24">24&#160;</span> Saying, Master, <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_25">25&#160;</span> Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother:
<span class="verse" id="MT22_26">26&#160;</span> Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_27">27&#160;</span> And last of all the woman died also.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore in the resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_29">29&#160;</span> Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_30">30&#160;</span> For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_31">31&#160;</span> But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_33">33&#160;</span> And when the multitude heard <span class='add'>this</span>, they were astonished at his doctrine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_34">34&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_35">35&#160;</span> Then one of them, <span class='add'>which was</span> a lawyer, asked <span class='add'>him a question</span>, tempting him, and saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_36">36&#160;</span> Master, which <span class='add'>is</span> the great commandment in the law?
<span class="verse" id="MT22_37">37&#160;</span> Jesus said unto him, <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_38">38&#160;</span> This is the first and great commandment.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_39">39&#160;</span> And the second <span class='add'>is</span> like unto it, <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_40">40&#160;</span> On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_41">41&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_42">42&#160;</span> Saying, What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, <span class='add'>The Son</span> of David.
<span class="verse" id="MT22_43">43&#160;</span> He saith unto them, How then doth David in spirit call him Lord, saying,
<span class="verse" id="MT22_44">44&#160;</span><a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool?
<span class="verse" id="MT22_45">45&#160;</span> If David then call him Lord, how is he his son?
<span class="verse" id="MT22_46">46&#160;</span> And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any <span class='add'>man</span> from that day forth ask him any more <span class='add'>questions.</span>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_1">1&#160;</span> Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples,
<span class="verse" id="MT23_2">2&#160;</span> Saying, The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat:
<span class="verse" id="MT23_3">3&#160;</span> All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, <span class='add'>that</span> observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay <span class='add'>them</span> on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_5">5&#160;</span> But all their works they do for to be seen of men: <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments,
<span class="verse" id="MT23_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
<span class="verse" id="MT23_7">7&#160;</span> And greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, <span class='add'>even</span> Christ; and all ye are brethren.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_9">9&#160;</span> And call no <span class='add'>man</span> your father upon the earth: <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for one is your Father, which is in heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_10">10&#160;</span> Neither be ye called masters: for one is your Master, <span class='add'>even</span> Christ.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_11">11&#160;</span> But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_13">13&#160;</span>¶ But <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in <span class='add'>yourselves</span>, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_14">14&#160;</span> Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for ye devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_15">15&#160;</span> Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_16">16&#160;</span> Woe unto you, <span class='add'>ye</span> blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor!
<span class="verse" id="MT23_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Ye</span> fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?
<span class="verse" id="MT23_18">18&#160;</span> And, Whosoever shall swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>guilty.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Ye</span> fools and blind: for whether <span class='add'>is</span> greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?
<span class="verse" id="MT23_20">20&#160;</span> Whoso therefore shall swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by all things thereon.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_21">21&#160;</span> And whoso shall swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth therein.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_22">22&#160;</span> And he that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_23">23&#160;</span> Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier <span class='add'>matters</span> of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Ye</span> blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_25">25&#160;</span> Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Thou</span> blind Pharisee, cleanse first that <span class='add'>which is</span> within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_27">27&#160;</span> Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead <span class='add'>men’s</span> bones, and of all uncleanness.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_28">28&#160;</span> Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_29">29&#160;</span> Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous,
<span class="verse" id="MT23_30">30&#160;</span> And say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_31">31&#160;</span> Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_32">32&#160;</span> Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Ye</span> serpents, <span class='add'>ye</span> generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_34">34&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and <span class='add'>some</span> of them ye shall kill and crucify; and <span class='add'>some</span> of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute <span class='add'>them</span> from city to city:
<span class="verse" id="MT23_35">35&#160;</span> That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_36">36&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_37">37&#160;</span><a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, <span class='add'>thou</span> that killest the prophets, <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under <span class='add'>her</span> wings, and ye would not!
<span class="verse" id="MT23_38">38&#160;</span> Behold, your house is left unto you desolate.
<span class="verse" id="MT23_39">39&#160;</span> For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> he that cometh in the name of the Lord. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_1">1&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to <span class='add'>him</span> for to shew him the buildings of the temple.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_2">2&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto them, See ye not all these things? verily I say unto you, <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what <span class='add'>shall be</span> the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
<span class="verse" id="MT24_4">4&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_5">5&#160;</span> For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_6">6&#160;</span> And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars: see that ye be not troubled: for all <span class='add'>these things</span> must come to pass, but the end is not yet.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_7">7&#160;</span> For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_8">8&#160;</span> All these <span class='add'>are</span> the beginning of sorrows.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_10">10&#160;</span> And then shall many be offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate one another.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_11">11&#160;</span> And many false prophets shall rise, and shall deceive many.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_12">12&#160;</span> And because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_13">13&#160;</span> But he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_14">14&#160;</span> And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by <a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:)
<span class="verse" id="MT24_16">16&#160;</span> Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains:
<span class="verse" id="MT24_17">17&#160;</span> Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house:
<span class="verse" id="MT24_18">18&#160;</span> Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_19">19&#160;</span> And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!
<span class="verse" id="MT24_20">20&#160;</span> But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the sabbath day:
<span class="verse" id="MT24_21">21&#160;</span> For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_22">22&#160;</span> And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect’s sake those days shall be shortened.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here <span class='add'>is</span> Christ, or there; believe <span class='add'>it</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_24">24&#160;</span> For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if <span class='add'>it were</span> possible, they shall deceive the very elect.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_25">25&#160;</span> Behold, I have told you before.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_26">26&#160;</span> Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, <span class='add'>he is</span> in the secret chambers; believe <span class='add'>it</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_27">27&#160;</span> For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For wheresoever the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Immediately after the tribulation of those days <a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken:
<span class="verse" id="MT24_30">30&#160;</span> And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he shall send his angels <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_32">32&#160;</span> Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer <span class='add'>is</span> nigh:
<span class="verse" id="MT24_33">33&#160;</span> So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, <span class='add'>even</span> at the doors.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_34">34&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_36">36&#160;</span>¶ But of that day and hour knoweth no <span class='add'>man</span>, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_37">37&#160;</span> But as the days of Noe <span class='add'>were</span>, so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_38">38&#160;</span><a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For as in the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,
<span class="verse" id="MT24_39">39&#160;</span> And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_40">40&#160;</span><a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall two be in the field; the one shall be taken, and the other left.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_41">41&#160;</span> Two <span class='add'>women shall be</span> grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken, and the other left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_42">42&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But know this, that if the goodman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_44">44&#160;</span> Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_45">45&#160;</span><a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season?
<span class="verse" id="MT24_46">46&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_47">47&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, That he shall make him ruler over all his goods.
<span class="verse" id="MT24_48">48&#160;</span> But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming;
<span class="verse" id="MT24_49">49&#160;</span> And shall begin to smite <span class='add'>his</span> fellowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken;
<span class="verse" id="MT24_50">50&#160;</span> The lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for <span class='add'>him</span>, and in an hour that he is not aware of,
<span class="verse" id="MT24_51">51&#160;</span> And shall <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cut him asunder, and appoint <span class='add'>him</span> his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_1">1&#160;</span> Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_2">2&#160;</span> And five of them were wise, and five <span class='add'>were</span> foolish.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_3">3&#160;</span> They that <span class='add'>were</span> foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_4">4&#160;</span> But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_5">5&#160;</span> While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_6">6&#160;</span> And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet him.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_7">7&#160;</span> Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_8">8&#160;</span> And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>gone out.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_9">9&#160;</span> But the wise answered, saying, <span class='add'>Not so</span>; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_10">10&#160;</span> And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_11">11&#160;</span> Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_12">12&#160;</span> But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For <span class='add'>the kingdom of heaven is</span> as a man travelling into a far country, <span class='add'>who</span> called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_15">15&#160;</span> And unto one he gave five <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man according to his several ability; and straightway took his journey.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_16">16&#160;</span> Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same, and made <span class='add'>them</span> other five talents.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_17">17&#160;</span> And likewise he that <span class='add'>had received</span> two, he also gained other two.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_18">18&#160;</span> But he that had received one went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord’s money.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_19">19&#160;</span> After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_20">20&#160;</span> And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents more.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_21">21&#160;</span> His lord said unto him, Well done, <span class='add'>thou</span> good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_22">22&#160;</span> He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents beside them.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_23">23&#160;</span> His lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_24">24&#160;</span> Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_25">25&#160;</span> And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, <span class='add'>there</span> thou hast <span class='add'>that is</span> thine.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_26">26&#160;</span> His lord answered and said unto him, <span class='add'>Thou</span> wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_27">27&#160;</span> Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and <span class='add'>then</span> at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_28">28&#160;</span> Take therefore the talent from him, and give <span class='add'>it</span> unto him which hath ten talents.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_30">30&#160;</span> And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_31">31&#160;</span>¶ When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_32">32&#160;</span> And before him shall be gathered all nations: and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth <span class='add'>his</span> sheep from the goats:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_33">33&#160;</span> And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_34">34&#160;</span> Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_36">36&#160;</span> Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_37">37&#160;</span> Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, and fed <span class='add'>thee</span>? or thirsty, and gave thee drink?
<span class="verse" id="MT25_38">38&#160;</span> When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed <span class='add'>thee</span>?
<span class="verse" id="MT25_39">39&#160;</span> Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee?
<span class="verse" id="MT25_40">40&#160;</span> And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done <span class='add'>it</span> unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done <span class='add'>it</span> unto me.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_41">41&#160;</span> Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_42">42&#160;</span> For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:
<span class="verse" id="MT25_43">43&#160;</span> I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_44">44&#160;</span> Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
<span class="verse" id="MT25_45">45&#160;</span> Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did <span class='add'>it</span> not to one of the least of these, ye did <span class='add'>it</span> not to me.
<span class="verse" id="MT25_46">46&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto his disciples,
<span class="verse" id="MT26_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Ye know that after two days is <span class='add'>the feast of</span> the passover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
<span class="verse" id="MT26_4">4&#160;</span> And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_5">5&#160;</span> But they said, Not on the feast <span class='add'>day</span>, lest there be an uproar among the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_6">6&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
<span class="verse" id="MT26_7">7&#160;</span> There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat <span class='add'>at meat</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_8">8&#160;</span> But when his disciples saw <span class='add'>it</span>, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose <span class='add'>is</span> this waste?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_9">9&#160;</span> For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_10">10&#160;</span> When Jesus understood <span class='add'>it</span>, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For ye have the poor always with you; but me ye have not always.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_12">12&#160;</span> For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did <span class='add'>it</span> for my burial.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_13">13&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the whole world, <span class='add'>there</span> shall also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,
<span class="verse" id="MT26_15">15&#160;</span> And said <span class='add'>unto them</span>, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_16">16&#160;</span> And from that time he sought opportunity to betray him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_18">18&#160;</span> And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_19">19&#160;</span> And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them; and they made ready the passover.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_21">21&#160;</span> And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_22">22&#160;</span> And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_23">23&#160;</span> And he answered and said, <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He that dippeth <span class='add'>his</span> hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_24">24&#160;</span> The Son of man goeth as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been good for that man if he had not been born.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_25">25&#160;</span> Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And as they were eating, <a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesus took bread, and <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blessed <span class='add'>it</span>, and brake <span class='add'>it</span>, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_27">27&#160;</span> And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> to them, saying, Drink ye all of it;
<span class="verse" id="MT26_28">28&#160;</span> For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_29">29&#160;</span> But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_30">30&#160;</span> And when they had sung an <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_31">31&#160;</span> Then saith Jesus unto them, <a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, <a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_32">32&#160;</span> But after I am risen again, <a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will go before you into Galilee.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_33">33&#160;</span> Peter answered and said unto him, Though all <span class='add'>men</span> shall be offended because of thee, <span class='add'>yet</span> will I never be offended.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_34">34&#160;</span> Jesus said unto him, <a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Verily I say unto thee, That this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_35">35&#160;</span> Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_36">36&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_37">37&#160;</span> And he took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_38">38&#160;</span> Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_39">39&#160;</span> And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as thou <span class='add'>wilt</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_40">40&#160;</span> And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_41">41&#160;</span> Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed <span class='add'>is</span> willing, but the flesh <span class='add'>is</span> weak.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_42">42&#160;</span> He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_43">43&#160;</span> And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_44">44&#160;</span> And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_45">45&#160;</span> Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_46">46&#160;</span> Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_47">47&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_48">48&#160;</span> Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he: hold him fast.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_49">49&#160;</span> And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kissed him.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_50">50&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_51">51&#160;</span> And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out <span class='add'>his</span> hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest’s, and smote off his ear.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_52">52&#160;</span> Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_53">53&#160;</span> Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_54">54&#160;</span> But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled, <a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that thus it must be?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_55">55&#160;</span> In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_56">56&#160;</span> But all this was done, that the <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_57">57&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And they that had laid hold on Jesus led <span class='add'>him</span> away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_58">58&#160;</span> But Peter followed him afar off unto the high priest’s palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to see the end.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_59">59&#160;</span> Now the chief priests, and elders, and all the council, sought false witness against Jesus, to put him to death;
<span class="verse" id="MT26_60">60&#160;</span> But found none: yea, though many false witnesses came, <span class='add'>yet</span> found they none. At the last came two false witnesses,
<span class="verse" id="MT26_61">61&#160;</span> And said, This <span class='add'>fellow</span> said, <a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_62">62&#160;</span> And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what <span class='add'>is it which</span> these witness against thee?
<span class="verse" id="MT26_63">63&#160;</span> But Jesus held his peace. And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_64">64&#160;</span> Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_65">65&#160;</span> Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_66">66&#160;</span> What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_67">67&#160;</span><a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then did they spit in his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him with <a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the palms of their hands,
<span class="verse" id="MT26_68">68&#160;</span> Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_69">69&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_70">70&#160;</span> But he denied before <span class='add'>them</span> all, saying, I know not what thou sayest.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_71">71&#160;</span> And when he was gone out into the porch, another <span class='add'>maid</span> saw him, and said unto them that were there, This <span class='add'>fellow</span> was also with Jesus of Nazareth.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_72">72&#160;</span> And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_73">73&#160;</span> And after a while came unto <span class='add'>him</span> they that stood by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art <span class='add'>one</span> of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_74">74&#160;</span> Then began he to curse and to swear, <span class='add'>saying</span>, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew.
<span class="verse" id="MT26_75">75&#160;</span> And Peter remembered the <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_1">1&#160;</span> When the morning was come, <a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>all the chief priests and elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death:
<span class="verse" id="MT27_2">2&#160;</span> And when they had bound him, they led <span class='add'>him</span> away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
<span class="verse" id="MT27_4">4&#160;</span> Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What <span class='add'>is that</span> to us? see thou <span class='add'>to that</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_5">5&#160;</span> And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, <a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and departed, and went and hanged himself.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_6">6&#160;</span> And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_7">7&#160;</span> And they took counsel, and bought with them the potter’s field, to bury strangers in.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_8">8&#160;</span> Wherefore that field was called, <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The field of blood, unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_9">9&#160;</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, <a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, <a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>whom they of the children of Israel did value;
<span class="verse" id="MT27_10">10&#160;</span> And gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord appointed me.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_11">11&#160;</span> And Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_12">12&#160;</span> And when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_13">13&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witness against thee?
<span class="verse" id="MT27_14">14&#160;</span> And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Now at <span class='add'>that</span> feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_16">16&#160;</span> And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is called Christ?
<span class="verse" id="MT27_18">18&#160;</span> For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_19">19&#160;</span>¶ When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_21">21&#160;</span> The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_22">22&#160;</span> Pilate <a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus which is called Christ? <span class='add'>They</span> all <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>say unto him, Let him be crucified.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_23">23&#160;</span> And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_24">24&#160;</span>¶ When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but <span class='add'>that</span> rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed <span class='add'>his</span> hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye <span class='add'>to it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_25">25&#160;</span> Then answered all the people, and said, His blood <span class='add'>be</span> on us, and on our children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered <span class='add'>him</span> to be crucified.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the <a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band <span class='add'>of soldiers</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_28">28&#160;</span> And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put <span class='add'>it</span> upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews!
<span class="verse" id="MT27_30">30&#160;</span> And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_31">31&#160;</span> And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify <span class='add'>him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to bear his cross.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skull, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_34">34&#160;</span>¶ They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and when he had tasted <span class='add'>thereof</span>, he would not drink.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_35">35&#160;</span> And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, <a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_36">36&#160;</span> And sitting down they watched him there;
<span class="verse" id="MT27_37">37&#160;</span> And set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_38">38&#160;</span> Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads,
<span class="verse" id="MT27_40">40&#160;</span> And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest <span class='add'>it</span> in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_41">41&#160;</span> Likewise also the chief priests mocking <span class='add'>him</span>, with the scribes and elders, said,
<span class="verse" id="MT27_42">42&#160;</span> He saved others; himself he cannot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_43">43&#160;</span><a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_44">44&#160;</span> The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_45">45&#160;</span> Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_46">46&#160;</span> And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, <a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
<span class="verse" id="MT27_47">47&#160;</span> Some of them that stood there, when they heard <span class='add'>that</span>, said, This <span class='add'>man</span> calleth for Elias.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_48">48&#160;</span> And straightway one of them ran, and took a spunge, <a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and filled <span class='add'>it</span> with vinegar, and put <span class='add'>it</span> on a reed, and gave him to drink.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_49">49&#160;</span> The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_50">50&#160;</span>¶ Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_51">51&#160;</span> And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent;
<span class="verse" id="MT27_52">52&#160;</span> And the graves were opened; and many bodies <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of the saints which slept arose,
<span class="verse" id="MT27_53">53&#160;</span> And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_54">54&#160;</span> Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_55">55&#160;</span> And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him:
<span class="verse" id="MT27_56">56&#160;</span> Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee’s children.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_57">57&#160;</span><a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathæa, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus’ disciple:
<span class="verse" id="MT27_58">58&#160;</span> He went to Pilate, and begged the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_59">59&#160;</span> And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
<span class="verse" id="MT27_60">60&#160;</span> And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and departed.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_61">61&#160;</span> And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_62">62&#160;</span>¶ Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate,
<span class="verse" id="MT27_63">63&#160;</span> Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise again.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_64">64&#160;</span> Command therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the first.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_65">65&#160;</span> Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make <span class='add'>it</span> as sure as ye can.
<span class="verse" id="MT27_66">66&#160;</span> So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MT28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_1">1&#160;</span> In the <a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_2">2&#160;</span> And, behold, there <a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_3">3&#160;</span> His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow:
<span class="verse" id="MT28_4">4&#160;</span> And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_5">5&#160;</span> And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_6">6&#160;</span> He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_7">7&#160;</span> And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_8">8&#160;</span> And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And as they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came and held him by the feet, and worshipped him.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_10">10&#160;</span> Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed unto the chief priests all the things that were done.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_12">12&#160;</span> And when they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers,
<span class="verse" id="MT28_13">13&#160;</span> Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him <span class='add'>away</span> while we slept.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_14">14&#160;</span> And if this come to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him, and secure you.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_15">15&#160;</span> So they took the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_17">17&#160;</span> And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.
<span class="verse" id="MT28_18">18&#160;</span> And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_19">19&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
<span class="verse" id="MT28_20">20&#160;</span> Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the end of the world. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_23'>3. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_3'>21 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_26'>25. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN29_35'>29. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_27'>38. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ruth <a href='RUT.xhtml#RT4_18'>4. 18</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R12_5'>2 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_1'>16. 1</a> &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_12'>17 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_24'>12. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_10'>3. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kin. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_21'>20 21</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_13'>3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Some read, <span class="add">Josias begat Jakim, and Jakim begat Jechonias.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. 3. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_16'>16</a>, <a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_27'>1. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_31'>1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_14'>7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">his name shall be called.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_6'>2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC5_2'>5. 2</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_42'>7. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">feed.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">offered.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS11_1'>11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_15'>31. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_4'>1. 4</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_2'>3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_3'>40. 3</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_34'>12. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">answerable to amendment of life.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_39'>8. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_19'>7. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_8'>1. 8</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_16'>3. 16</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_26'>1. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> he]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_9'>1. 9</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_21'>3. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_12'>1. 12</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_1'>4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_3'>8 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_11'>91. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_16'>6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_13'>6. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_20'>10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_14'>1. 14</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_14'>4. 14</a> John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN4_43'>4. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">delivered up.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_1'>9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_14'>1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_16'>1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_20'>6. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_11'>37. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_13'>65. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS24_4'>24. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_14'>3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_14'>4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">lying.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_50'>9. 50</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_34'>14. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_21'>4. 21</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_16'>8. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_33'>11. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">The word in the original signlfieth <span class="add">a measure containing about a pint less than a peck.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_12'>2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_17'>16. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM2_10'>2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to them.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_13'>20. 13</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_17'>5. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_58'>12. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_14'>20. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_8'>18. 8</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_47'>9. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">do cause thee to offend.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_1'>24 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_18'>16. 18</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_7'>20. 7</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_12'>19. 12</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_11'>5. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.37</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_12'>5 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_24'>21. 24</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_20'>24. 20</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_21'>19. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_29'>6. 29</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_17'>12. 17</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C16_7'>6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_8'>15. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>19. 18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_27'>6. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_34'>23. 34</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_60'>7. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_32'>6. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">with.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_8'>12. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">cause not a trumpet to be sounded.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> hand]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">7. 14.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_2'>11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_25'>11. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_33'>12. 33</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_19'>6. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_13'>16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS55_22'>55. 22</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_22'>12. 22</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_7'>5. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_37'>6. 37</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_1'>2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_24'>4. 24</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_38'>6. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_41'>6. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_22'>21. 22</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_24'>11. 24</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_9'>11. 9</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_24'>16. 24</a>. James 1. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_5'>5</a>, <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_31'>6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_24'>13. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">How.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_43'>6. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_10'>3 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_13'>2. 13</a>. James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_22'>1. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_27'>13. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS6_8'>6. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_47'>6. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_22'>1 22</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_32'>4. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_40'>1. 40</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_12'>5. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV14_4'>14. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_29'>1 29</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_38'>4. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_32'>1 32</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_40'>4. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_4'>53. 4</a>. 1 Pet <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_24'>2 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_57'>9. 57</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_37'>4. 37</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_23'>8. 23</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK5_1'>5. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_26'>8. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_8'>2. 8</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_18'>5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_14'>2. 14</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_27'>5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_6'>6. 6</a> ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_7'>12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T11_15'>1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_18'>2. 18</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_33'>5. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">raw,</span> or, <span class="add">unwrought cloth.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK5_22'>5. 22</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_41'>8. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">this fame.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_14'>11. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.34</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_24'>12. 24</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_22'>3. 22</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_15'>11. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_34"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.34</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 out the devils]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_6'>6 6</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_22'>13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_34'>6. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_36"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">were tired and lay down.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_17'>27. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_2'>10. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_14'>3. 14</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_1'>9. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_46'>13. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_9'>10 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_8'>6. 8</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_3'>9. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_35'>22. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">Get.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_7'>10. 7</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T15_18'>5. 18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_8'>10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_11'>6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_51'>13. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_3'>10. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">simple.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_11'>13. 11</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_16'>21. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_13'>13. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">end,</span> or, <span class="add">finish.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_40'>6 40</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_16'>13. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_22'>4 22</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_17'>8. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_2'>12. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_4'>12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class="add">It is in value half-penny farthing in the original, as being the tenth part of the Roman penny.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S214_11'>14. 11</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_34'>27. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_8'>12. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_38'>8. 38</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_26'>9. 26</a>. 2 Tim. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_12'>2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_51'>12. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC7_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_26'>14. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.38</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_24'>16. 24</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_34'>8. 34</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_23'>9. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.39</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_25'>12. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_16'>10. 16</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_20'>13. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_41'>9. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK7_18'>7. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_6'>35. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_1'>61. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_1'>3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">is gotten by force, and they that thrust men.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML4_5'>4. 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK7_31'>7. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_13'>10. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_21'>10. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_35'>3. 35</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_46'>6. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_16'>6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.30</a>
 <span class="ft">1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN5_3'>5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_25'>23. 25</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_23'>2. 23</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S121_6'>21. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 29. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_32'>32</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_33'>33</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV8_31'>8. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_9'>24. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_9'>23. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_6'>6. 6</a>. ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_1'>3. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_6'>6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">took counsel.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_1'>42. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_14'>11. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Is this]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_34'>9. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_28'>3. 28</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_10'>12. 10</a>. 1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN5_16'>5. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_45'>6. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.38</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_1'>16. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_29'>11. 29</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C11_22'>1. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Jonah <a href='JON.xhtml#JH1_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Jonah <a href='JON.xhtml#JH3_5'>3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_24'>11. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB6_4'>6. 4</a> &amp; <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_26'>10. 26</a>. 2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_20'>2. 20</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_31'>3. 31</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_20'>8. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_1'>4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_5'>8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 had not root]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_29'>25. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_9'>6. 9</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_12'>4. 12</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_10'>8. 10</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_40'>12. 40</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC28_26'>28. 26</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_8'>11. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_24'>10. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_30'>4. 30</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_19'>13. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_20'>13. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.33</a>
 <span class="ft">The word in the Greek is <span class="add">a measure containing about a peck and a half, wanting a little more than a pint.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_33'>4. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_2'>78. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_13'>3. 13</a> Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_15'>14. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_41"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">scandals.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_3'>12 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_46"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13.46</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 he went]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_1'>6 1</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_16'>4. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_55"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.55</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_42'>6. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_4'>6. 4</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK4_24'>4. 24</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN4_44'>4. 44</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_14'>6. 14</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_7'>9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">are wrought by him.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK3_19'>3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_16'>18. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_21'>20. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_26'>21. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_32'>6 32</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_10'>9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_35'>6 35</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_5'>6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_46'>6. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_16'>6 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">strong.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_53'>6. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>20. 12</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_16'>5. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_17'>21. 17</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_9'>20. 9</a> Prov <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_20'>20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark 7 <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_11'>11</a>, <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_13'>29. 13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_14'>7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN15_2'>15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_39'>6. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_17'>7 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_5'>6. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_21'>8 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_24'>7. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_6'>10. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_81'>7. 81</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS25_5'>25. 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_11'>8. 11</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_54'>12. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT14_17'>14. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_84'>15. 84</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_27'>8. 27</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_18'>9. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_69'>6. 69</a>,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 art Christ]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_42'>1. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_23'>20. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> and]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_38'>10. 38</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_34'>8. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>62. 12</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_6'>2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_1'>9 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_27'>9. 27</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_2'>9 2</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_28'>9. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P21_17'>1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_14'>11. 14</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_11'>9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_17'>9. 17</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_38'>9. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_6'>17. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_17'>20. 17</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_31'>9. 31</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_44'>9. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Called in the original <span class="add">didrachma,</span> being in value fifteen pence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">a stater.</span> It is half an ounce of silver, in value two shillings and sixpence, after five shillings the ounce.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_33'>9 33</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_46'>9. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_14'>19. 14</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C114_20'>14. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_42'>9. 42</a>. Luke 17. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_1'>1</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_30'>5. 30</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_45'>9. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_10'>19. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK15_4'>15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_17'>19 17</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_3'>17 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_15'>19 15</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_17'>8 17</a> 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C213_1'>13. 1</a> Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_28'>10 28</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.17</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C15_9'>5 9</a>. 2 Thess. <a href='2TH.xhtml#H23_14'>3. 14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_23'>20 23</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C15_4'>5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_4'>17. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft">750 <span class="add">ounces of silver, which after live shillings the ounce is</span> 187<span class="add">l.</span> 10<span class="add">s.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">besought him.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class="add">The Roman penny is the eighth part of an ounce, which after five shillings the ounce is seven pence half-penny.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>1. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_24'>2. 24</a> Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_31'>5. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C16_16'>6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_1'>24 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_32'>5. 32</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_11'>10 11</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_18'>16. 18</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_11'>7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_13'>10. 13</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_15'>18. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_17'>10. 17</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_18'>18. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_13'>20. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_28'>10. 28</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_28'>18 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_80'>22. 80</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.30</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_16'>20. 16</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_31'>10. 31</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_30'>13. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><span class="add">The Roman penny is the eighth part of an ounce, which after five shillings the ounce is seven pence half-penny.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">have continued one hour only.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_30'>19. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_32'>10 32</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_31'>18. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_32'>18. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_35'>10 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_25'>22. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Phil. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_7'>2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_46'>10 46</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_35'>18. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_1'>11 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_29'>19. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_11'>62. 11</a>. Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_9'>9. 9</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_4'>11 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_15'>11. 15</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_45'>19. 45</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN2_13'>2. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_7'>56. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_11'>7. 11</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_17'>11. 17</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_46'>19. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS8_2'>8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_13'>11. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_27'>11 27</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_1'>20. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT14_5'>14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.32</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_1'>3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_1'>5. 1</a>. Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_21'>2. 21</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_1'>12. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_9'>20. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.38</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_4'>26 4</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN11_53'>11. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_22'>118. 22</a> Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC4_11'>4. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_14'>8. 14</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_33'>9. 33</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_7'>2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_16'>14. 16</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_9'>19. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_16'>20. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_13'>12. 13</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_20'>20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_2'>20. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">inscription.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_7'>13. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_18'>12. 18</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_27'>20. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_8'>23. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_5'>25. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_6'>8. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_28'>12. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_5'>6 5</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_27'>10. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_35'>12. 35</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_41'>20. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_44"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_1'>110. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_46'>11. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_38'>15. 38</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_38'>12. 38</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_43'>11. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.8</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM3_1'>3. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_11'>14. 11</a> &amp; <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_14'>18. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_52'>11. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_40'>12. 40</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_47'>20. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">a debtor,</span> or, <span class="add">bound.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_42'>11. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_39'>11. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_8'>4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.37</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK13_34'>13. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.37</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R224_21'>24. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.37</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Esd. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_30'>1. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_1'>13. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_6'>21.6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_44'>19. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_17'>10. 17</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_12'>21. 12</a> John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_2'>16. 2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_27'>9. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_21'>13 21</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_23'>17. 23</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_37'>17. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_10'>13. 10</a> Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_7'>32. 7</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_31'>2. 31</a> Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_24'>13. 24</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_25'>21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.31</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_52'>15. 52</a> 1 Thess. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_16'>4. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">with a trumpet, and a great voice.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_31'>13. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_5'>7. 5</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_26'>17. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_36'>17. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_35'>13. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_39'>12. 39</a>. 1 Thess. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_2'>5. 2</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV16_15'>16. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_42'>12. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_51"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">cut him off.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">going out.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_42'>24. 42</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_33'>13. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_12'>19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.15</a>
 <span class="ft">187<span class="add">l.</span> 10<span class="add">s.</span> ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_24'>18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_12'>13. 12</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_25'>4. 25</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_18'>8. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_7'>58. 7</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_7'>18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS6_8'>6. 8</a>. ch. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_23'>7. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_2'>12. 2</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_29'>5. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_1'>14. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_1'>22. 1</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_1'>13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.3</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN11_47'>11. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_3'>14. 3</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN11_1'>11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_11'>15. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_10'>14. 10</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_3'>22. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_12'>14. 12</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_7'>22. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_17'>14. 17</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_14'>22. 14</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_9'>41. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.26</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_23'>11. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Many Greek copies have, <span class="add">gave thanks.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">psalm.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_27'>14. 27</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_32'>16. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC13_7'>13. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_28'>14. 28</a> &amp; <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK16_7'>16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.34</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_38'>13 38</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_32'>14. 32</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_89'>22. 89</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_43'>14. 43</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_47'>22. 47</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_3'>18. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_52"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_6'>9. 6</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV13_10'>13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_10'>53. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_56"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.56</a>
 <span class="ft">Lam. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_20'>4 20</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_53'>14. 53</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_54'>22 54</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_13'>18. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_61"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.61</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN2_19'>2 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_64"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.64</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_27'>16. 27</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_10'>14 10</a>. 1 Thess. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_16'>4. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_67"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.67</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS50_6'>50. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_67"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.67</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">rods.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_69"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.69</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_66'>14 66</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_55'>22. 55</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_25'>18. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_75"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 26.75</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 words]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_1'>15. 1</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_66'>22. 66</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_28'>18. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC1_18'>1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC1_19'>1 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC11_12'>11. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">whom they bought of the children of Israel.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 saith]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_17'>23. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_40'>18. 40</a>. Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_14'>3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_22"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27.22</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 said]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_22"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27.22</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 said]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.27</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_2'>19. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">governor’s house.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_21'>15 21</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_26'>23. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.33</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_17'>19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_18'>22. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_8'>22. 8</a>. Wisd. 2. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_15'>15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.46</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_1'>22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_21'>69. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_52"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27.52</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 of Saints]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_42'>15 42</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_50'>23. 50</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_38'>19. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT28_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK16_1'>16. 1</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_1'>20 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT28_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">had been</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT28_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK16_15'>16. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
