<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Micah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Micah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='MIC.xhtml#MC7_0'>7</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='MC0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Micah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="MC1_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, <span class='add'>and</span> Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Hear, all ye people; <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hearken, O earth, and <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all that therein is: and let the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_3">3&#160;</span> For, behold, <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cometh forth out of his <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>place, and will come down, and tread upon the <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>high places of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_4">4&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, <span class='add'>and</span> as the waters <span class='add'>that are</span> poured down <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a steep place.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_5">5&#160;</span> For the transgression of Jacob <span class='add'>is</span> all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. What <span class='add'>is</span> the transgression of Jacob? <span class='add'>is it</span> not Samaria? and what <span class='add'>are</span> the high places of Judah? <span class='add'>are they</span> not Jerusalem?
<span class="verse" id="MC1_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, <span class='add'>and</span> as plantings of a vineyard: and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_7">7&#160;</span> And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces, and all the hires thereof shall be burned with the fire, and all the idols thereof will I lay desolate: for she gathered <span class='add'>it</span> of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to the hire of an harlot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC1_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>owls.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_9">9&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>her wound <span class='add'>is</span> incurable; for it is come unto Judah; he is come unto the gate of my people, <span class='add'>even</span> to Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Declare ye <span class='add'>it</span> not at Gath, weep ye not at all: in the house of <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Aphrah <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>roll thyself in the dust.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_11">11&#160;</span> Pass ye away, <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thou <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>inhabitant of Saphir, having thy <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shame naked: the inhabitant of <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beth-ezel; he shall receive of you his standing.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_12">12&#160;</span> For the inhabitant of Maroth <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>waited carefully for good: but evil came down from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the gate of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_13">13&#160;</span> O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast: she <span class='add'>is</span> the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore shalt thou give presents <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to Moresheth-gath: the houses of <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Achzib <span class='add'>shall be</span> a lie to the kings of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_15">15&#160;</span> Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah: <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MC1_16">16&#160;</span> Make thee <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children; enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thee.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC2_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the power of their hand.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_2">2&#160;</span> And they covet <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fields, and take <span class='add'>them</span> by violence; and houses, and take <span class='add'>them</span> away: so they <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks; neither shall ye go haughtily: for this time <span class='add'>is</span> evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC2_4">4&#160;</span>¶ In that day shall <span class='add'>one</span> take up a parable against you, and lament <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with a doleful lamentation, <span class='add'>and</span> say, We be utterly spoiled: he hath changed the portion of my people: how hath he removed <span class='add'>it</span> from me! <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>turning away he hath divided our fields.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt have none that shall <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Prophesy ye not, <span class='add'>say they to them that</span> prophesy: they shall not prophesy to them, <span class='add'>that</span> they shall not take shame.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC2_7">7&#160;</span>¶ O <span class='add'>thou that art</span> named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>straitened? <span class='add'>are</span> these his doings? do not my words do good to him that walketh <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>uprightly?
<span class="verse" id="MC2_8">8&#160;</span> Even <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye pull off the robe <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with the garment from them that pass by securely as men averse from war.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_9">9&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses; from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_10">10&#160;</span> Arise ye, and depart; for this <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>your</span> rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy <span class='add'>you</span>, even with a sore destruction.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_11">11&#160;</span> If a man <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie, <span class='add'>saying</span>, I will prophesy unto thee of wine and of strong drink; he shall even be the prophet of this people.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee; I will surely gather the remnant of Israel; I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shall make great noise by reason of <span class='add'>the multitude of</span> men.
<span class="verse" id="MC2_13">13&#160;</span> The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have passed through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king shall pass before them, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> on the head of them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC3_1">1&#160;</span> And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; <span class='add'>Is it</span> not for you to know judgment?
<span class="verse" id="MC3_2">2&#160;</span> Who hate the good, and love the evil; who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones;
<span class="verse" id="MC3_3">3&#160;</span> Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_4">4&#160;</span> Then shall they cry unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but he will not hear them: he will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning the prophets that make my people err, that <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore night <span class='add'>shall be</span> unto you, <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_7">7&#160;</span> Then shall the seers be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lips; for <span class='add'>there is</span> no answer of God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_9">9&#160;</span> Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_10">10&#160;</span> They build up Zion with <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_11">11&#160;</span> The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and say, <span class='add'>Is</span> not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> among us? none evil can come upon us.
<span class="verse" id="MC3_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore shall Zion for your sake be <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>plowed <span class='add'>as</span> a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC4_1">1&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the last days it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> the mountain of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills; and people shall flow unto it.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_2">2&#160;</span> And many nations shall come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC4_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>plowshares, and their spears into <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_4">4&#160;</span> But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make <span class='add'>them</span> afraid: for the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_5">5&#160;</span> For all people will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God for ever and ever.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_6">6&#160;</span> In that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, will I assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted;
<span class="verse" id="MC4_7">7&#160;</span> And I will make her that <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>halted a remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC4_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_9">9&#160;</span> Now why dost thou cry out aloud? <span class='add'>is there</span> no king in thee? is thy counsellor perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_10">10&#160;</span> Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou shalt go <span class='add'>even</span> to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC4_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_12">12&#160;</span> But they know not the thoughts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither understand they his counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.
<span class="verse" id="MC4_13">13&#160;</span> Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass: and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their gain unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC5_1">1&#160;</span> Now gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops: he hath laid siege against us: they shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_2">2&#160;</span> But thou, <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Beth-lehem Ephratah, <span class='add'>though</span> thou be little among the thousands of Judah, <span class='add'>yet</span> out of thee shall he come forth unto me <span class='add'>that is</span> to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth <span class='add'>have been</span> from of old, from <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>everlasting.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore will he give them up, until the time <span class='add'>that</span> she which travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC5_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And he shall stand and <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>feed in the strength of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the majesty of the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God; and they shall abide: for now shall he be great unto the ends of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_5">5&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>man</span> shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into our land: and when he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>principal men.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_6">6&#160;</span> And they shall <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in the entrances thereof: thus shall he deliver <span class='add'>us</span> from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC5_7">7&#160;</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a dew from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as the showers upon the grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC5_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sheep: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_9">9&#160;</span> Thine hand shall be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_10">10&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots:
<span class="verse" id="MC5_11">11&#160;</span> And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy strong holds:
<span class="verse" id="MC5_12">12&#160;</span> And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thine hand; and thou shalt have no <span class='add'>more</span> soothsayers:
<span class="verse" id="MC5_13">13&#160;</span> Thy graven images also will I cut off, and thy <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>standing images out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine hands.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_14">14&#160;</span> And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I destroy thy <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cities.
<span class="verse" id="MC5_15">15&#160;</span> And I will execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC6_1">1&#160;</span> Hear ye now what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith; Arise, contend thou <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>before the <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_2">2&#160;</span> Hear ye, O mountains, the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath a controversy with his people, and he will plead with Israel.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_3">3&#160;</span> O my people, what have I done unto thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_4">4&#160;</span> For I brought thee up out of the land of <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants; and I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_5">5&#160;</span> O my people, remember now what <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him from <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shittim unto Gilgal; that ye may know the righteousness of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC6_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Wherewith shall I come before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> bow myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of a year old?
<span class="verse" id="MC6_7">7&#160;</span> Will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be pleased with thousands of rams, <span class='add'>or</span> with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn <span class='add'>for</span> my transgression, the fruit of my <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>body <span class='add'>for</span> the sin of my soul?
<span class="verse" id="MC6_8">8&#160;</span> He hath <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shewed thee, O man, what <span class='add'>is</span> good; and what doth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>walk humbly with thy God?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC6_9">9&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> voice crieth unto the city, and <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>the man of</span> wisdom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath appointed it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC6_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>scant measure <span class='add'>that is</span> abominable?
<span class="verse" id="MC6_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Shall I count <span class='add'>them</span> pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights?
<span class="verse" id="MC6_12">12&#160;</span> For the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue <span class='add'>is</span> deceitful in their mouth.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore also will I make <span class='add'>thee</span> sick in smiting thee, in making <span class='add'>thee</span> desolate because of thy sins.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thy casting down <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the midst of thee; and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver; and <span class='add'>that</span> which thou deliverest will I give up to the sword.
<span class="verse" id="MC6_15">15&#160;</span> Thou shalt <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thee with oil; and sweet wine, but shalt not drink wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ For <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the statutes of <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that I should make thee a <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MC7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_1">1&#160;</span> Woe is me! for I am as <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: <span class='add'>there is</span> no cluster to eat: my soul desired the firstripe fruit.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_2">2&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>good <span class='add'>man</span> is perished out of the earth: and <span class='add'>there is</span> none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood; they hunt every man his brother with a net.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_3">3&#160;</span>¶ That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge <span class='add'>asketh</span> for a reward; and the great <span class='add'>man</span>, he uttereth <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his mischievous desire: so they wrap it up.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_4">4&#160;</span> The best of them <span class='add'>is</span> as a brier: the most upright <span class='add'>is sharper</span> than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen <span class='add'>and</span> thy visitation cometh; now shall be their perplexity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_6">6&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man’s enemies <span class='add'>are</span> the men of his own house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore I will look unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>shall be</span> a light unto me.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_9">9&#160;</span> I will bear the indignation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, <span class='add'>and</span> I shall behold his righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Then <span class='add'>she that is</span> mine enemy shall see <span class='add'>it</span>, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Where is the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God? mine eyes shall behold her: now <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>In</span> the day that thy <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>walls are to be built, <span class='add'>in</span> that day shall the decree be far removed.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>In</span> that day <span class='add'>also</span> he shall come even to thee from Assyria, <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and <span class='add'>from</span> the fortified cities, and from the fortress even to the river, and from sea to sea, and <span class='add'>from</span> mountain to mountain.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Notwithstanding the land shall be desolate because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily <span class='add'>in</span> the wood, in the midst of Carmel: let them feed <span class='add'>in</span> Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_15">15&#160;</span> According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I shew unto him marvellous <span class='add'>things</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MC7_16">16&#160;</span>¶ The nations shall see and be confounded at all their might: they shall lay <span class='add'>their</span> hand upon <span class='add'>their</span> mouth, their ears shall be deaf.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_17">17&#160;</span> They shall lick the <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dust like a serpent, they shall move out of their holes like <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>worms of the earth: they shall be afraid of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, and shall fear because of thee.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_18">18&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> a God like unto thee, that <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth <span class='add'>in</span> mercy.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_19">19&#160;</span> He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.
<span class="verse" id="MC7_20">20&#160;</span> Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, <span class='add'>and</span> the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Hear, ye people, all of them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_1'>32. 1</a>. Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_2'>1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the fulness thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS26_21'>26 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_3'>115. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_13'>32 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_29'>33. 29</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS97_5'>97. 5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a descent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. daughters of the owl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, she is grievously sick of her wounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Sam. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S21_20'>1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Dust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_26'>6. 26</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thou that dwellest fairly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. inhabitress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. 47. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_2'>2</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the country of flocks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a place near.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, was grieved.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, for.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A lie.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the glory of Israel shall come, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_8'>5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, defraud.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with a lamentation of lamentations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, instead of restoring.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 32 <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_8'>8</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Prophesy not as they prophesy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Drop, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_10'>30. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shortened?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upright?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. yesterday.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. over against a garment.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, wives.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, walk with the wind, and lie falsely.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC2_11'>2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from a vision.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from divining.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb upper lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_27'>22 27</a>. Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. saying.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC3_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR26_18'>26. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_2'>2. 2</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_4'>2 4</a> Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_10'>3 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC4_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, scythes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC4_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP3_19'>3 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC4_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_14'>7. 14</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_33'>1. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT2_6'>2. 6</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_42'>7. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the days of eternity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, rule.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. princes of men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eat up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with her own naked swords.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, statues.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC5_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, enemies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, with</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_2'>1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_51'>12 51</a> &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_30'>14 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_5'>22 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_7'>23 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_1'>25 1</a> Josh <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS5_10'>5. 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sons of a year?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. belly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_12'>10 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. humble thyself to walk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thy name shall see that which is</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Is there yet unto every man an house of the wicked, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. measure of leanness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Shall I be pure with, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_38'>28. 38</a>. Hag. <a href='HAG.xhtml#HG1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he doth much keep the &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. 16. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_25'>25</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_30'>16 30</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC6_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, astonishment.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the gatherings of summer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS12_1'>12. 1</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_1'>57. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, godly. or, merciful.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the mischief of his soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. 10 <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_21'>21</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_35'>35</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_36'>36</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_16'>21. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, And thou wilt see her that is mine enemy, and cover her with shame.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_10'>79. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_2'>115. 2</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_17'>2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. she shall be for a treading down.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM9_11'>9. 11</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, even to.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, After that it hath been.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Rule.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_9'>72. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, creeping things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MC7_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 34. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_6'>6</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
