<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Nehemiah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Nehemiah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH13_0'>13</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='NH0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Nehemiah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="NH1_1">1&#160;</span> The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to pass in the month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace,
<span class="verse" id="NH1_2">2&#160;</span> That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and <span class='add'>certain</span> men of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="NH1_3">3&#160;</span> And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity there in the province <span class='add'>are</span> in great affliction and reproach: the wall of Jerusalem also <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>is</span> broken down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH1_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned <span class='add'>certain</span> days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH1_5">5&#160;</span> And said, I beseech thee, <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of heaven, the great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that love him and observe his commandments:
<span class="verse" id="NH1_6">6&#160;</span> Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned against thee: both I and my father’s house have sinned.
<span class="verse" id="NH1_7">7&#160;</span> We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou commandedst thy servant Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NH1_8">8&#160;</span> Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>If</span> ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad among the nations:
<span class="verse" id="NH1_9">9&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>if</span> ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them; <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>though there were of you cast out unto the uttermost part of the heaven, <span class='add'>yet</span> will I gather them from thence, and will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there.
<span class="verse" id="NH1_10">10&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.
<span class="verse" id="NH1_11">11&#160;</span> O <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king’s cupbearer.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH2_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, <span class='add'>that</span> wine <span class='add'>was</span> before him: and I took up the wine, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> unto the king. Now I had not been <span class='add'>beforetime</span> sad in his presence.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_2">2&#160;</span> Wherefore the king said unto me, Why <span class='add'>is</span> thy countenance sad, seeing thou <span class='add'>art</span> not sick? this <span class='add'>is</span> nothing <span class='add'>else</span> but sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid,
<span class="verse" id="NH2_3">3&#160;</span> And said unto the king, Let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers’ sepulchres, <span class='add'>lieth</span> waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?
<span class="verse" id="NH2_4">4&#160;</span> Then the king said unto me, For what dost thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_5">5&#160;</span> And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers’ sepulchres, that I may build it.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_6">6&#160;</span> And the king said unto me, (the <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>queen also sitting by him,) For how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_7">7&#160;</span> Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let letters be given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me over till I come into Judah;
<span class="verse" id="NH2_8">8&#160;</span> And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of the king’s forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the palace which <span class='add'>appertained</span> to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH2_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the king’s letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and horsemen with me.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_10">10&#160;</span> When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_11">11&#160;</span> So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither told I <span class='add'>any</span> man what <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem: neither <span class='add'>was there any</span> beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_13">13&#160;</span> And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_14">14&#160;</span> Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king’s pool: but <span class='add'>there was</span> no place for the beast <span class='add'>that was</span> under me to pass.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_15">15&#160;</span> Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and <span class='add'>so</span> returned.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_16">16&#160;</span> And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither had I as yet told <span class='add'>it</span> to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH2_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we <span class='add'>are</span> in, how Jerusalem <span class='add'>lieth</span> waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire: come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_18">18&#160;</span> Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as also the king’s words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for <span class='add'>this</span> good <span class='add'>work</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NH2_19">19&#160;</span> But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What <span class='add'>is</span> this thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the king?
<span class="verse" id="NH2_20">20&#160;</span> Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants will arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH3_1">1&#160;</span> Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the tower of <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hananeel.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_2">2&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them builded Zaccur the son of Imri.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_3">3&#160;</span> But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who <span class='add'>also</span> laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_4">4&#160;</span> And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabeel. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of Baana.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_5">5&#160;</span> And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not their necks to the work of their <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Lord.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_6">6&#160;</span> Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_7">7&#160;</span> And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the governor on this side the river.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_8">8&#160;</span> Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of <span class='add'>one of</span> the apothecaries, and they <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_9">9&#160;</span> And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_10">10&#160;</span> And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of Hashabniah.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_11">11&#160;</span> Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahath-moab, repaired the <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>other piece, and the tower of the furnaces.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_12">12&#160;</span> And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_13">13&#160;</span> The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung gate.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_14">14&#160;</span> But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of part of Beth-haccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_15">15&#160;</span> But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the wall of the pool of <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Siloah by the king’s garden, and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_16">16&#160;</span> After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half part of Beth-zur, unto <span class='add'>the place</span> over against the sepulchres of David, and to the <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pool that was made, and unto the house of the mighty.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_17">17&#160;</span> After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his part.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_18">18&#160;</span> After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the ruler of the half part of Keilah.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_19">19&#160;</span> And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the turning <span class='add'>of the wall</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_20">20&#160;</span> After him Baruch the son of <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Zabbai earnestly repaired the other piece, from the turning <span class='add'>of the wall</span> unto the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_21">21&#160;</span> After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz another piece, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_22">22&#160;</span> And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_23">23&#160;</span> After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house. After him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah by his house.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_24">24&#160;</span> After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece, from the house of Azariah unto the turning <span class='add'>of the wall</span>, even unto the corner.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_25">25&#160;</span> Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning <span class='add'>of the wall</span>, and the tower which lieth out from the king’s high house, that <span class='add'>was</span> by the <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_26">26&#160;</span> Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ophel, unto <span class='add'>the place</span> over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_27">27&#160;</span> After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of Ophel.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_28">28&#160;</span> From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over against his house.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_29">29&#160;</span> After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his house. After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of the east gate.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_30">30&#160;</span> After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_31">31&#160;</span> After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith’s son unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad, and to the <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>going up of the corner.
<span class="verse" id="NH3_32">32&#160;</span> And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH4_1">1&#160;</span> But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_2">2&#160;</span> And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said, What do these feeble Jews? will they <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned?
<span class="verse" id="NH4_3">3&#160;</span> Now Tobiah the Ammonite <span class='add'>was</span> by him, and he said, Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_4">4&#160;</span> Hear, O our God; for we are <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>despised: and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity:
<span class="verse" id="NH4_5">5&#160;</span> And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee: for they have provoked <span class='add'>thee</span> to anger before the builders.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_6">6&#160;</span> So built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH4_7">7&#160;</span>¶ But it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls of Jerusalem <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>were made up, <span class='add'>and</span> that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very wroth,
<span class="verse" id="NH4_8">8&#160;</span> And conspired all of them together to come <span class='add'>and</span> to fight against Jerusalem, and <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to hinder it.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_9">9&#160;</span> Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_10">10&#160;</span> And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and <span class='add'>there is</span> much rubbish; so that we are not able to build the wall.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_11">11&#160;</span> And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_12">12&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times, <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>From all places whence ye shall return unto us <span class='add'>they will be upon you</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH4_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Therefore set I <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the lower places behind the wall, <span class='add'>and</span> on the higher places, I even set the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_14">14&#160;</span> And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them: remember the Lord, <span class='add'>which is</span> great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_15">15&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH4_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass from that time forth, <span class='add'>that</span> the half of my servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers <span class='add'>were</span> behind all the house of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_17">17&#160;</span> They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, <span class='add'>every one</span> with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other <span class='add'>hand</span> held a weapon.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_18">18&#160;</span> For the builders, every one had his sword girded <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by his side, and <span class='add'>so</span> builded. And he that sounded the trumpet <span class='add'>was</span> by me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH4_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, The work <span class='add'>is</span> great and large, and we are separated upon the wall, one far from another.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_20">20&#160;</span> In what place <span class='add'>therefore</span> ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us: our God shall fight for us.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_21">21&#160;</span> So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_22">22&#160;</span> Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a guard to us, and labour on the day.
<span class="verse" id="NH4_23">23&#160;</span> So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>saving that</span> every one put them off for washing.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH5_1">1&#160;</span> And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brethren the Jews.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_2">2&#160;</span> For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, <span class='add'>are</span> many: therefore we take up corn <span class='add'>for them</span>, that we may eat, and live.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Some</span> also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands, vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_4">4&#160;</span> There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the king’s tribute, <span class='add'>and that upon</span> our lands and vineyards.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_5">5&#160;</span> Yet now our flesh <span class='add'>is</span> as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and <span class='add'>some</span> of our daughters are brought unto bondage <span class='add'>already:</span> neither <span class='add'>is it</span> in our power <span class='add'>to redeem them;</span> for other men have our lands and vineyards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH5_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_7">7&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother. And I set a great assembly against them.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_8">8&#160;</span> And I said unto them, We after our ability have <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>redeemed our brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace, and found nothing <span class='add'>to answer</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_9">9&#160;</span> Also I said, It <span class='add'>is</span> not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?
<span class="verse" id="NH5_10">10&#160;</span>I likewise, <span class='add'>and</span> my brethren, and my servants, might exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leave off this usury.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_11">11&#160;</span> Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth <span class='add'>part</span> of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_12">12&#160;</span> Then said they, We will restore <span class='add'>them</span>, and will require nothing of them; so will we do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_13">13&#160;</span> Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>emptied. And all the congregation said, Amen, and praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And the people did according to this promise.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH5_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, <span class='add'>that is</span>, twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_15">15&#160;</span> But the former governors that <span class='add'>had been</span> before me were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people: but so did not I, because of the fear of God.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_16">16&#160;</span> Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we any land: and all my servants <span class='add'>were</span> gathered thither unto the work.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_17">17&#160;</span>Moreover <span class='add'>there were</span> at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that <span class='add'>are</span> about us.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_18">18&#160;</span>Now <span class='add'>that</span> which was prepared <span class='add'>for me</span> daily <span class='add'>was</span> one ox <span class='add'>and</span> six choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not I the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.
<span class="verse" id="NH5_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Think upon me, my God, for good, <span class='add'>according</span> to all that I have done for this people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH6_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the wall, and <span class='add'>that</span> there was no breach left therein; (though at that time I had not set up the doors upon the gates;)
<span class="verse" id="NH6_2">2&#160;</span> That Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet together in <span class='add'>some one of</span> the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_3">3&#160;</span> And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> doing a great work, so that I cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?
<span class="verse" id="NH6_4">4&#160;</span> Yet they sent unto me four times after this sort; and I answered them after the same manner.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_5">5&#160;</span> Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand;
<span class="verse" id="NH6_6">6&#160;</span>Wherein <span class='add'>was</span> written, It is reported among the heathen, and <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Gashmu saith <span class='add'>it, that</span> thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according to these words.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_7">7&#160;</span> And thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, <span class='add'>There is</span> a king in Judah: and now shall it be reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_8">8&#160;</span> Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_9">9&#160;</span> For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, <span class='add'>O God</span>, strengthen my hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH6_10">10&#160;</span> Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabeel, who <span class='add'>was</span> shut up; and he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the night will they come to slay thee.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_11">11&#160;</span> And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who <span class='add'>is there</span>, that, <span class='add'>being</span> as I <span class='add'>am</span>, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_12">12&#160;</span> And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore <span class='add'>was</span> he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and <span class='add'>that</span> they might have <span class='add'>matter</span> for an evil report, that they might reproach me.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_14">14&#160;</span> My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH6_15">15&#160;</span>¶ So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth <span class='add'>day</span> of <span class='add'>the month</span> Elul, in fifty and two days.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard <span class='add'>thereof</span>, and all the heathen that <span class='add'>were</span> about us saw <span class='add'>these things</span>, they were much cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH6_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sent many letters unto Tobiah, and <span class='add'>the letters</span> of Tobiah came unto them.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_18">18&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>there were</span> many in Judah sworn unto him, because he <span class='add'>was</span> the son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah.
<span class="verse" id="NH6_19">19&#160;</span> Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>words to him. <span class='add'>And</span> Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_2">2&#160;</span> That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he <span class='add'>was</span> a faithful man, and feared God above many.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_3">3&#160;</span> And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the doors, and bar <span class='add'>them:</span> and appoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one <span class='add'>to be</span> over against his house.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_4">4&#160;</span> Now the city <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>large and great: but the people <span class='add'>were</span> few therein, and the houses <span class='add'>were</span> not builded.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the first, and found written therein,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>These <span class='add'>are</span> the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his city;
<span class="verse" id="NH7_7">7&#160;</span> Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Baanah. The number, <span class='add'>I say</span>, of the men of the people of Israel <span class='add'>was this;</span>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_8">8&#160;</span> The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_9">9&#160;</span> The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_10">10&#160;</span> The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_11">11&#160;</span> The children of Pahath-moab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred <span class='add'>and</span> eighteen.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_12">12&#160;</span> The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_13">13&#160;</span> The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_14">14&#160;</span> The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_15">15&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Binnui, six hundred forty and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_16">16&#160;</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_17">17&#160;</span> The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_18">18&#160;</span> The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_19">19&#160;</span> The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_20">20&#160;</span> The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_21">21&#160;</span> The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_22">22&#160;</span> The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_23">23&#160;</span> The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_24">24&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hariph, an hundred and twelve.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_25">25&#160;</span> The children of <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Gibeon, ninety and five.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_26">26&#160;</span> The men of Beth-lehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_27">27&#160;</span> The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_28">28&#160;</span> The men of <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Beth-azmaveth, forty and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_29">29&#160;</span> The men of <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Kirjath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty and three.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_30">30&#160;</span> The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty and one.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_31">31&#160;</span> The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_32">32&#160;</span> The men of Beth-el and Ai, an hundred twenty and three.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_33">33&#160;</span> The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_34">34&#160;</span> The children of the other <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_35">35&#160;</span> The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_36">36&#160;</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_37">37&#160;</span> The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and one.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_38">38&#160;</span> The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_39">39&#160;</span>¶ The priests: the children of <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_40">40&#160;</span> The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_41">41&#160;</span> The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_42">42&#160;</span> The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_43">43&#160;</span>¶ The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, <span class='add'>and</span> of the children of <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hodevah, seventy and four.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_44">44&#160;</span>¶ The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_45">45&#160;</span>¶ The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_46">46&#160;</span>¶ The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the children of Tabbaoth,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_47">47&#160;</span> The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_48">48&#160;</span> The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_49">49&#160;</span> The children of Hanan, the children of Giddel, the children of Gahar,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_50">50&#160;</span> The children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_51">51&#160;</span> The children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phaseah,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_52">52&#160;</span> The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_53">53&#160;</span> The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_54">54&#160;</span> The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_55">55&#160;</span> The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Tamah,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_56">56&#160;</span> The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_57">57&#160;</span>¶ The children of Solomon’s servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_58">58&#160;</span> The children of Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_59">59&#160;</span> The children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Amon.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_60">60&#160;</span> All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon’s servants, <span class='add'>were</span> three hundred ninety and two.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_61">61&#160;</span><a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And these <span class='add'>were</span> they which went up <span class='add'>also</span> from Tel-melah, Tel-haresha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father’s house, nor their <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seed, whether they <span class='add'>were</span> of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_62">62&#160;</span> The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_63">63&#160;</span>¶ And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai, which took <span class='add'>one</span> of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_64">64&#160;</span> These sought their register <span class='add'>among</span> those that were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_65">65&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood <span class='add'>up</span> a priest with Urim and Thummim.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_66">66&#160;</span>¶ The whole congregation together <span class='add'>was</span> forty and two thousand three hundred and threescore,
<span class="verse" id="NH7_67">67&#160;</span> Beside their manservants and their maidservants, of whom <span class='add'>there were</span> seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and singing women.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_68">68&#160;</span> Their horses, seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two hundred forty and five:
<span class="verse" id="NH7_69">69&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Their</span> camels, four hundred thirty and five: six thousand seven hundred and twenty asses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH7_70">70&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. The Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty basons, five hundred and thirty priests’ garments.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_71">71&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>some</span> of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred pound of silver.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_72">72&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> which the rest of the people gave <span class='add'>was</span> twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand pound of silver, and threescore and seven priests’ garments.
<span class="verse" id="NH7_73">73&#160;</span> So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers, and <span class='add'>some</span> of the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children of Israel <span class='add'>were</span> in their cities.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH8_1">1&#160;</span> And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the street that <span class='add'>was</span> before the water gate; <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and they spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded to Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_2">2&#160;</span> And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both of men and women, and all <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_3">3&#160;</span> And he read therein before the street that <span class='add'>was</span> before the water gate <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from the morning until midday, before the men and the women, and those that could understand; and the ears of all the people <span class='add'>were attentive</span> unto the book of the law.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_4">4&#160;</span> And Ezra the scribe stood upon a <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana, Zechariah, <span class='add'>and</span> Meshullam.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_5">5&#160;</span> And Ezra opened the book in the <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sight of all the people; (for he was above all the people;) and when he opened it, all the people stood up:
<span class="verse" id="NH8_6">6&#160;</span> And Ezra blessed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the great God. And all the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with <span class='add'>their</span> faces to the ground.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_7">7&#160;</span> Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people <span class='add'>stood</span> in their place.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_8">8&#160;</span> So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused <span class='add'>them</span> to understand the reading. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH8_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Nehemiah, which <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people, This day <span class='add'>is</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God; mourn not, nor weep. For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_10">10&#160;</span> Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for <span class='add'>this</span> day <span class='add'>is</span> holy unto our <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Lord: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is your strength.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_11">11&#160;</span> So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace, for the day <span class='add'>is</span> holy; neither be ye grieved.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_12">12&#160;</span> And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH8_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And on the second day were gathered together the chief of the fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to understand the words of the law.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_14">14&#160;</span> And they found written in the law which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>booths in the feast of the seventh month:
<span class="verse" id="NH8_15">15&#160;</span> And that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as <span class='add'>it is</span> written. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH8_16">16&#160;</span>¶ So the people went forth, and brought <span class='add'>them</span>, and made themselves booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water gate, and in the street of the gate of Ephraim.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_17">17&#160;</span> And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the captivity made booths, and sat under the booths: for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done so. And there was very great gladness.
<span class="verse" id="NH8_18">18&#160;</span> Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on the eighth day <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a solemn assembly, according unto the manner.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH9_1">1&#160;</span> Now in the twenty and fourth day of <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>this month the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_2">2&#160;</span> And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>strangers, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_3">3&#160;</span> And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God <span class='add'>one</span> fourth part of the day; and <span class='add'>another</span> fourth part they confessed, and worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH9_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then stood up upon the <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, <span class='add'>and</span> Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_5">5&#160;</span> Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, <span class='add'>and</span> Pethahiah, said, Stand up <span class='add'>and</span> bless the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God for ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_6">6&#160;</span>Thou, <span class='add'>even</span> thou, <span class='add'>art</span> <span class='nd'>LORD</span> alone; <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all <span class='add'>things</span> that <span class='add'>are</span> therein, the seas, and all that <span class='add'>is</span> therein, and thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_7">7&#160;</span>Thou <span class='add'>art</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the God, who didst choose <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham;
<span class="verse" id="NH9_8">8&#160;</span> And foundest his heart <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>faithful before thee, and madest a <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give <span class='add'>it, I say</span>, to his seed, and hast performed thy words; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> righteous:
<span class="verse" id="NH9_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And didst see the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red sea;
<span class="verse" id="NH9_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land: for thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them. So didst thou get thee a name, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors thou threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mighty waters.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_12">12&#160;</span> Moreover thou <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in the night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they should go.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>true laws, good statutes and commandments:
<span class="verse" id="NH9_14">14&#160;</span> And madest known unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant:
<span class="verse" id="NH9_15">15&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and promisedst them that they should <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>go in to possess the land <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which thou hadst sworn to give them.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_16">16&#160;</span> But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to thy commandments,
<span class="verse" id="NH9_17">17&#160;</span> And refused to obey, neither were mindful of <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>thy wonders that thou didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a captain to return to their bondage: but thou <span class='add'>art</span> <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest them not.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_18">18&#160;</span> Yea, <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This <span class='add'>is</span> thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great provocations;
<span class="verse" id="NH9_19">19&#160;</span> Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them not in the wilderness: the <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pillar of the cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night, to shew them light, and the way wherein they should go.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_20">20&#160;</span> Thou gavest also thy <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>good spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not thy <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_21">21&#160;</span> Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, <span class='add'>so that</span> they lacked nothing; their <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_22">22&#160;</span> Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations, and didst divide them into corners: so they possessed the land of <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_23">23&#160;</span> Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go in to possess <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_24">24&#160;</span> So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the land, that they might do with them <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as they would.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_25">25&#160;</span> And they took strong cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses full of all goods, <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wells digged, vineyards, and oliveyards, and <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fruit trees in abundance: so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy great goodness.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_26">26&#160;</span> Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets which testified against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great provocations.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_27">27&#160;</span> Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who vexed them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thee, thou heardest <span class='add'>them</span> from heaven; and according to thy manifold mercies thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_28">28&#160;</span> But after they had rest, <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they did evil again before thee: therefore leftest thou them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto thee, thou heardest <span class='add'>them</span> from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them according to thy mercies;
<span class="verse" id="NH9_29">29&#160;</span> And testifiedst against them, that thou mightest bring them again unto thy law: yet they dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against thy judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them;) and <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_30">30&#160;</span> Yet many years didst thou <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>forbear them, and testifiedst <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against them by thy spirit <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_31">31&#160;</span> Nevertheless for thy great mercies’ sake thou didst not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a gracious and merciful God.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_32">32&#160;</span> Now therefore, our God, the great, the <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>trouble seem little before thee, <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_33">33&#160;</span>Howbeit thou <span class='add'>art</span> just in all that is brought upon us; for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly:
<span class="verse" id="NH9_34">34&#160;</span> Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy commandments and thy testimonies, wherewith thou didst testify against them.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_35">35&#160;</span> For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_36">36&#160;</span>Behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> servants this day, and <span class='add'>for</span> the land that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof, behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> servants in it:
<span class="verse" id="NH9_37">37&#160;</span> And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we <span class='add'>are</span> in great distress.
<span class="verse" id="NH9_38">38&#160;</span> And because of all this we make a sure <span class='add'>covenant</span>, and write <span class='add'>it;</span> and our princes, Levites, <span class='add'>and</span> priests, <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>seal <span class='add'>unto it</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH10_1">1&#160;</span> Now <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>those that sealed <span class='add'>were</span>, Nehemiah, <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the Tirshatha, the son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_2">2&#160;</span> Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_3">3&#160;</span> Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_4">4&#160;</span> Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_5">5&#160;</span> Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_6">6&#160;</span> Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_7">7&#160;</span> Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_8">8&#160;</span> Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these <span class='add'>were</span> the priests.
<span class="verse" id="NH10_9">9&#160;</span> And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;
<span class="verse" id="NH10_10">10&#160;</span> And their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_11">11&#160;</span> Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_12">12&#160;</span> Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_13">13&#160;</span> Hodijah, Bani, Beninu.
<span class="verse" id="NH10_14">14&#160;</span> The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_15">15&#160;</span> Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_16">16&#160;</span> Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_17">17&#160;</span> Ater, Hizkijah, Azzur,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_18">18&#160;</span> Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_19">19&#160;</span> Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_20">20&#160;</span> Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_21">21&#160;</span> Meshezabeel, Zadok, Jaddua,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_22">22&#160;</span> Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_23">23&#160;</span> Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_24">24&#160;</span> Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_25">25&#160;</span> Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_26">26&#160;</span> And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan,
<span class="verse" id="NH10_27">27&#160;</span> Malluch, Harim, Baanah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH10_28">28&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding;
<span class="verse" id="NH10_29">29&#160;</span> They clave to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God’s law, which was given <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our Lord, and his judgments and his statutes;
<span class="verse" id="NH10_30">30&#160;</span> And that we would not give <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>our daughters unto the people of the land, nor take their daughters for our sons:
<span class="verse" id="NH10_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And <span class='add'>if</span> the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath day to sell, <span class='add'>that</span> we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on the holy day: and <span class='add'>that</span> we would leave the seventh year, and the <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>exaction of <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>every debt.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH10_32">32&#160;</span> Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God;
<span class="verse" id="NH10_33">33&#160;</span> For the shewbread, and for the continual meat offering, and for the continual burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for the set feasts, and for the holy <span class='add'>things</span>, and for the sin offerings to make an atonement for Israel, and <span class='add'>for</span> all the work of the house of our God.
<span class="verse" id="NH10_34">34&#160;</span> And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood offering, to bring <span class='add'>it</span> into the house of our God, after the houses of our fathers, at times appointed year by year, to burn upon the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, as <span class='add'>it is</span> written in the <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>law:
<span class="verse" id="NH10_35">35&#160;</span> And to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits of all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="NH10_36">36&#160;</span> Also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as <span class='add'>it is</span> written <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in the house of our God:
<span class="verse" id="NH10_37">37&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> we should bring the firstfruits of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees, of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our ground unto the Levites, that the same Levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.
<span class="verse" id="NH10_38">38&#160;</span> And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure house.
<span class="verse" id="NH10_39">39&#160;</span> For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring the offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the chambers, where <span class='add'>are</span> the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake the house of our God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH11_1">1&#160;</span> And the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts <span class='add'>to dwell</span> in <span class='add'>other</span> cities.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_2">2&#160;</span> And the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered themselves to dwell at Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH11_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem: but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their cities, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon’s servants.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_4">4&#160;</span> And at Jerusalem dwelt <span class='add'>certain</span> of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of Perez;
<span class="verse" id="NH11_5">5&#160;</span> And Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_6">6&#160;</span> All the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem <span class='add'>were</span> four hundred threescore and eight valiant men.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_7">7&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_8">8&#160;</span> And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_9">9&#160;</span> And Joel the son of Zichri <span class='add'>was</span> their overseer: and Judah the son of Senuah <span class='add'>was</span> second over the city.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_10">10&#160;</span> Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_11">11&#160;</span> Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, <span class='add'>was</span> the ruler of the house of God.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_12">12&#160;</span> And their brethren that did the work of the house <span class='add'>were</span> eight hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_13">13&#160;</span> And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_14">14&#160;</span> And their brethren, mighty men of valour, an hundred twenty and eight: and their overseer <span class='add'>was</span> Zabdiel, <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the son of <span class='add'>one of</span> the great men.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_15">15&#160;</span> Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;
<span class="verse" id="NH11_16">16&#160;</span> And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>had</span> the oversight of the outward business of the house of God.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_17">17&#160;</span> And Mattaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, <span class='add'>was</span> the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_18">18&#160;</span> All the Levites in the holy city <span class='add'>were</span> two hundred fourscore and four.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_19">19&#160;</span> Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren that kept <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the gates, <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred seventy and two.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH11_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the residue of Israel, of the priests, <span class='add'>and</span> the Levites, <span class='add'>were</span> in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But the Nethinims dwelt in <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa <span class='add'>were</span> over the Nethinims.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_22">22&#160;</span> The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem <span class='add'>was</span> Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of the sons of Asaph, the singers <span class='add'>were</span> over the business of the house of God.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_23">23&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it was</span> the king’s commandment concerning them, that <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_24">24&#160;</span> And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, <span class='add'>was</span> at the king’s hand in all matters concerning the people.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_25">25&#160;</span> And for the villages, with their fields, <span class='add'>some</span> of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjath-arba, and <span class='add'>in</span> the villages thereof, and at Dibon, and <span class='add'>in</span> the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and <span class='add'>in</span> the villages thereof,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_26">26&#160;</span> And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Beth-phelet,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_27">27&#160;</span> And at Hazar-shual, and at Beer-sheba, and <span class='add'>in</span> the villages thereof,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_28">28&#160;</span> And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_29">29&#160;</span> And at En-rimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_30">30&#160;</span> Zanoah, Adullam, and <span class='add'>in</span> their villages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, at Azekah, and <span class='add'>in</span> the villages thereof. And they dwelt from Beer-sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_31">31&#160;</span> The children also of Benjamin <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>from Geba <span class='add'>dwelt</span> <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>at Michmash, and Aija, and Beth-el, and <span class='add'>in</span> their villages,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_33">33&#160;</span> Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_34">34&#160;</span> Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
<span class="verse" id="NH11_35">35&#160;</span> Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.
<span class="verse" id="NH11_36">36&#160;</span> And of the Levites <span class='add'>were</span> divisions <span class='add'>in</span> Judah, <span class='add'>and</span> in Benjamin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH12_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>priests and the Levites that went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_2">2&#160;</span> Amariah, <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Malluch, Hattush,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Shechaniah, <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Rehum, <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Meremoth,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_4">4&#160;</span> Iddo, <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ginnetho, Abijah,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Miamin, <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Maadiah, Bilgah,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_6">6&#160;</span> Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These <span class='add'>were</span> the chief of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_8">8&#160;</span> Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, <span class='add'>and</span> Mattaniah, <span class='add'>which was</span> over <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the thanksgiving, he and his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_9">9&#160;</span> Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> over against them in the watches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH12_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Joiakim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_11">11&#160;</span> And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_12">12&#160;</span> And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_13">13&#160;</span> Of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_14">14&#160;</span> Of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_15">15&#160;</span> Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_16">16&#160;</span> Of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_17">17&#160;</span> Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_18">18&#160;</span> Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_19">19&#160;</span> And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_20">20&#160;</span> Of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_21">21&#160;</span> Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethaneel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH12_22">22&#160;</span>¶ The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, <span class='add'>were</span> recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_23">23&#160;</span> The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, <span class='add'>were</span> written in the book of the <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_24">24&#160;</span> And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise <span class='add'>and</span> to give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, ward over against ward.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_25">25&#160;</span> Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, <span class='add'>were</span> porters keeping the ward at the <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>thresholds of the gates.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_26">26&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest, the scribe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH12_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with singing, <span class='add'>with</span> cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_28">28&#160;</span> And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of Netophathi;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_29">29&#160;</span> Also from the house of Gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them villages round about Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_30">30&#160;</span> And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_31">31&#160;</span> Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and appointed two great <span class='add'>companies of them that gave</span> thanks, <span class='add'>whereof one</span> went on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate:
<span class="verse" id="NH12_32">32&#160;</span> And after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_33">33&#160;</span> And Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_34">34&#160;</span> Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah,
<span class="verse" id="NH12_35">35&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>certain</span> of the priests’ sons with trumpets; <span class='add'>namely</span>, Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Michaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph:
<span class="verse" id="NH12_36">36&#160;</span> And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_37">37&#160;</span> And at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the wall, above the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_38">38&#160;</span> And the other <span class='add'>company of them that gave</span> thanks went over against <span class='add'>them</span>, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_39">39&#160;</span> And from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above the fish gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even unto the sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_40">40&#160;</span> So stood the two <span class='add'>companies of them that gave</span> thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me:
<span class="verse" id="NH12_41">41&#160;</span> And the priests; Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, <span class='add'>and</span> Hananiah, with trumpets;
<span class="verse" id="NH12_42">42&#160;</span> And Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sang loud, with Jezrahiah <span class='add'>their</span> overseer.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_43">43&#160;</span> Also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for God had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH12_44">44&#160;</span>¶ And at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of the law for the priests and Levites: <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that waited.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_45">45&#160;</span> And both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their God, and the ward of the purification, <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>according to the commandment of David, <span class='add'>and</span> of Solomon his son.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_46">46&#160;</span> For in the days of David <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and Asaph of old <span class='add'>there were</span> chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God.
<span class="verse" id="NH12_47">47&#160;</span> And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day his portion: and they <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sanctified <span class='add'>holy things</span> unto the Levites; <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and the Levites sanctified <span class='add'>them</span> unto the children of Aaron.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NH13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH13_1">1&#160;</span> On that day <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they read in the <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>book of Moses in the <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>audience of the people; and therein was found written, that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever;
<span class="verse" id="NH13_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our God turned the curse into a blessing.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_3">3&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH13_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And before this, Eliashib the priest, <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God, <span class='add'>was</span> allied unto Tobiah:
<span class="verse" id="NH13_5">5&#160;</span> And he had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which was commanded <span class='add'>to be given</span> to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the offerings of the priests.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_6">6&#160;</span>But in all this <span class='add'>time</span> was not I at Jerusalem: for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto the king, and <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>after certain days <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>obtained I leave of the king:
<span class="verse" id="NH13_7">7&#160;</span> And I came to Jerusalem, and understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_8">8&#160;</span> And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_9">9&#160;</span> Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with the meat offering and the frankincense. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH13_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given <span class='add'>them:</span> for the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_11">11&#160;</span> Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>place.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_12">12&#160;</span> Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine and the oil unto the <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>treasuries.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_13">13&#160;</span> And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>next to them <span class='add'>was</span> Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah: for they were counted faithful, and <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>their office <span class='add'>was</span> to distribute unto their brethren.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offices thereof.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH13_15">15&#160;</span>¶ In those days saw I in Judah <span class='add'>some</span> treading wine presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all <span class='add'>manner of</span> burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified <span class='add'>against them</span> in the day wherein they sold victuals.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_16">16&#160;</span> There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_17">17&#160;</span> Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing <span class='add'>is</span> this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?
<span class="verse" id="NH13_18">18&#160;</span> Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_19">19&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and <span class='add'>some</span> of my servants set I at the gates, <span class='add'>that</span> there should no burden be brought in on the sabbath day.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_20">20&#160;</span> So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_21">21&#160;</span> Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>about the wall? if ye do <span class='add'>so</span> again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth came they no <span class='add'>more</span> on the sabbath.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_22">22&#160;</span> And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and <span class='add'>that</span> they should come <span class='add'>and</span> keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember me, O my God, <span class='add'>concerning</span> this also, and spare me according to the <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>greatness of thy mercy.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NH13_23">23&#160;</span>¶ In those days also saw I Jews <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>had married wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, <span class='add'>and</span> of Moab:
<span class="verse" id="NH13_24">24&#160;</span> And their children spake half in the speech of Ashdod, and <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>could not speak in the Jews’ language, but according to the language <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of each people.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_25">25&#160;</span> And I contended with them, and <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_26">26&#160;</span> Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel: <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to sin.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_27">27&#160;</span> Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to transgress against our God in marrying strange wives?
<span class="verse" id="NH13_28">28&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, <span class='add'>was</span> son in law to Sanballat the Horonite: therefore I chased him from me.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_29">29&#160;</span> Remember them, O my God, <a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>because they have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.
<span class="verse" id="NH13_30">30&#160;</span> Thus cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards of the priests and the Levites, every one in his business;
<span class="verse" id="NH13_31">31&#160;</span> And for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for good. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_10'>25. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Dan. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_4'>9. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_25'>4. 25</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_4'>30. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH1_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="nd">Lord</span>]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH2_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH2_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits my]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_38'>31. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at his hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="nd">Lord</span>]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, left Jerusalem unto the broad wall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. second measure.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_7'>9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_20'>20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Zaccal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_2'>32. 2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R227_3'>27. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the tower.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH3_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, corner chamber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. leave to themselves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. despite.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ascended.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to make an error to it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, That from all places ye must return to us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the lower parts of the place, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. on his loins.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH4_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, every one went with his weapon for water.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH5_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my heart consulted in me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH5_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_48'>25. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH5_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. empty, or, void.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH13_22'>13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH6_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH6_2'>2.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH6_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiplied [their] letters passing to Tobiah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH6_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, matters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. broad in spaces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_1'>2. 1</a>. &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Seraiah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Bam.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Jora.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Gibbar.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Azmaveth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Kirjatharim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.34</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_12'>12.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.39</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_7'>24. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_43"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.43</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_40'>2. 40</a>. or, Judah, Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_59"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Ami.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_61"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_59'>2. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_61"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pedigree.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_65"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.65</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the governor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH7_70"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.70</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. part.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER3_1'>3. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER7_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that understood in hearing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the light.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. tower of wood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the governor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="nd">Lord</span>]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that they might instruct in the words of the law.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_34'>23. 34</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_13'>16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH8_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a restraint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH8_2'>8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strange children.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, scaffold</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN11_31'>11. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_1'>12. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_5'>17. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_6'>15. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_7'>12. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>15. 18</a>. &amp;c 17. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_7'>7</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_7'>3. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_10'>14. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_0'>7</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_0'>8</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_0'>9</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_0'>10</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_0'>12</a>, &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_0'>14</a>, chapters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_22'>14. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_10'>15. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_20'>19. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_1'>20. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. laws of truth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_15'>16. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_6'>17. 6</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_9'>20. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. which thou hadst lift up thine hand to give them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_4'>14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb a God of pardons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_4'>32. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_22'>13. 22</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_14'>14. 14</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_17'>11. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_15'>16. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_6'>17. 6</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS5_12'>5. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_4'>8. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_21'>21. 21</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. according to their will.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cisterns.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. tree of food.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_10'>19. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they returned to do evil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they gave a withdrawing shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. protract over them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.30</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K217_13'>17 13</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_15'>36. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the hand of thy prophets.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_6'>34. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. weariness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that hath found us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH9_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are at the sealing, or, sealed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the sealings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the governor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_43'>2. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_16'>34. 16</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_3'>7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_10'>20. 10</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_3'>23. 3</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_12'>5. 12</a>. ch. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH13_15'>13. 15</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_4'>25. 4</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_2'>15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. every hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_0'>28,</a> &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU29_0'>29.</a> Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_19'>23. 19</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_23'>19. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_2'>13. 2</a> Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_17'>23. 17</a>. Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_19'>15. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_12'>18. 12</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH10_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_26'>18. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the son of Haggedolim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. were over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the gates.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH3_26'>3. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the tower.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a sure ordinance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of Geba.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH11_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to Michmash.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezra <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER2_1'>2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_14'>14.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_14'>14.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_15'>15.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_15'>15.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_16'>16.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_17'>17.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_17'>17.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_20'>20.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, the psalms of thanksgiving.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R19_14'>9. 14</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, treasuries, or, assemblies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.42</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made their voice to be heard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_44"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.44</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, appointed by the law.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the joy of Judah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that stood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.45</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R125_0'>25.</a> &amp;c <a href='1CH.xhtml#R126_0'>26.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_46"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.46</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R125_1'>25. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_47"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.47</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, set apart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH12_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_26'>18. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. there was read.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_5'>22. 5</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_3'>23. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ears.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Num. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_5'>22. 5</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_9'>24. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. being set over.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the commandment of the Levites.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at the end of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, I earnestly requested.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. standing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, storehouses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. at their hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it was upon them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH13_22'>22.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. kindnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, observations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. before the wall?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, multitude.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. had made to dwell with them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they discerned not to speak.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of people and people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reviled them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_1'>11. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NH13_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for the defilings.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
