<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Numbers 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Numbers</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU36_0'>36</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='NU0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Fourth Book of Moses, called Numbers  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="NU1_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the congregation, on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the number of <span class='add'>their</span> names, every male by their <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>polls;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_3">3&#160;</span> From twenty years old and upward, all that are able to go forth to war in Israel: thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_4">4&#160;</span> And with you there shall be a man of every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the men that shall stand with you: of <span class='add'>the tribe of</span> Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_6">6&#160;</span> Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_7">7&#160;</span> Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_8">8&#160;</span> Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_9">9&#160;</span> Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_10">10&#160;</span> Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of Ammihud: of Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_11">11&#160;</span> Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_12">12&#160;</span> Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_13">13&#160;</span> Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_14">14&#160;</span> Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_15">15&#160;</span> Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_16">16&#160;</span>These <span class='add'> were</span> the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Moses and Aaron took these men which are expressed by <span class='add'>their</span> names:
<span class="verse" id="NU1_18">18&#160;</span> And they assembled all the congregation together on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the second month, and they declared their pedigrees after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>polls.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_19">19&#160;</span> As the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_20">20&#160;</span> And the children of Reuben, Israel’s eldest son, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, by their <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_21">21&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Reuben, <span class='add'>were</span> forty and six thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of them, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_23">23&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Simeon, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and nine thousand and three hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_25">25&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Gad, <span class='add'>were</span> forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_27">27&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Judah, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Issachar, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_29">29&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Issachar, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and four thousand and four hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_31">31&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Zebulun, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and seven thousand and four hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Joseph, <span class='add'>namely</span>, of the children of Ephraim, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_33">33&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Ephraim, <span class='add'>were</span> forty thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_34">34&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_35">35&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Manasseh, <span class='add'>were</span> thirty and two thousand and two hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_36">36&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_37">37&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Benjamin, <span class='add'>were</span> thirty and five thousand and four hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_38">38&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_39">39&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Dan, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and two thousand and seven hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_40">40&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_41">41&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Asher, <span class='add'>were</span> forty and one thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_42">42&#160;</span>¶ Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_43">43&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the tribe of Naphtali, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and three thousand and four hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_44">44&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, <span class='add'>being</span> twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_45">45&#160;</span> So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war in Israel;
<span class="verse" id="NU1_46">46&#160;</span> Even all they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU1_47">47&#160;</span>¶ But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_48">48&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU1_49">49&#160;</span> Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="NU1_50">50&#160;</span> But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over all things that <span class='add'>belong</span> to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_51">51&#160;</span> And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_52">52&#160;</span> And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their hosts.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_53">53&#160;</span> But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of testimony.
<span class="verse" id="NU1_54">54&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so did they.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU2_2">2&#160;</span> Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father’s house: <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_3">3&#160;</span> And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and Nahshon the son of Amminadab <span class='add'>shall be</span> captain of the children of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_4">4&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_5">5&#160;</span> And those that do pitch next unto him <span class='add'>shall be</span> the tribe of Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar <span class='add'>shall be</span> captain of the children of Issachar.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_6">6&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and four thousand and four hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon <span class='add'>shall be</span> captain of the children of Zebulun.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_8">8&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_9">9&#160;</span> All that were numbered in the camp of Judah <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred, throughout their armies. These shall first set forth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ On the south side <span class='add'>shall be</span> the standard of the camp of Reuben according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben <span class='add'>shall be</span> Elizur the son of Shedeur.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_11">11&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, <span class='add'>were</span> forty and six thousand and five hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_12">12&#160;</span> And those which pitch by him <span class='add'>shall be</span> the tribe of Simeon: and the captain of the children of Simeon <span class='add'>shall be</span> Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_13">13&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_14">14&#160;</span> Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad <span class='add'>shall be</span> Eliasaph the son of Reuel.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_15">15&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> forty and five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_16">16&#160;</span> All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_18">18&#160;</span>¶ On the west side <span class='add'>shall be</span> the standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim <span class='add'>shall be</span> Elishama the son of Ammihud.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_19">19&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> forty thousand and five hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_20">20&#160;</span>And by him <span class='add'>shall be</span> the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the children of Manasseh <span class='add'>shall be</span> Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_21">21&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> thirty and two thousand and two hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_22">22&#160;</span> Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of Benjamin <span class='add'>shall be</span> Abidan the son of Gideoni.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_23">23&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> thirty and five thousand and four hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_24">24&#160;</span> All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies. And they shall go forward in the third rank. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_25">25&#160;</span>¶ The standard of the camp of Dan <span class='add'>shall be</span> on the north side by their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan <span class='add'>shall be</span> Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_26">26&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_27">27&#160;</span> And those that encamp by him <span class='add'>shall be</span> the tribe of Asher: and the captain of the children of Asher <span class='add'>shall be</span> Pagiel the son of Ocran.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_28">28&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> forty and one thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of Naphtali <span class='add'>shall be</span> Ahira the son of Enan.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_30">30&#160;</span> And his host, and those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> fifty and three thousand and four hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_31">31&#160;</span> All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go hindmost with their standards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU2_32">32&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> those which were numbered of the children of Israel by the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps throughout their hosts <span class='add'>were</span> six hundred thousand and three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_33">33&#160;</span> But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NU2_34">34&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set forward, every one after their families, according to the house of their fathers.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_1">1&#160;</span>These also <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day <span class='add'>that</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake with Moses in mount Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_2">2&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_3">3&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were anointed, <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whom he consecrated to minister in the priest’s office.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And Nadab and Abihu died before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when they offered strange fire before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest’s office in the sight of Aaron their father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU3_6">6&#160;</span> Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_7">7&#160;</span> And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_8">8&#160;</span> And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they <span class='add'>are</span> wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on their priest’s office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU3_12">12&#160;</span> And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine;
<span class="verse" id="NU3_13">13&#160;</span> Because all the firstborn <span class='add'>are</span> mine; <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>for</span> on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>shall they be: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU3_15">15&#160;</span> Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_16">16&#160;</span> And Moses numbered them according to the <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as he was commanded.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_18">18&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the sons of Gershon by their families; Libni, and Shimei.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_19">19&#160;</span> And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_20">20&#160;</span> And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These <span class='add'> are</span> the families of the Levites according to the house of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_21">21&#160;</span> Of Gershon <span class='add'>was</span> the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimites: these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Gershonites.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_22">22&#160;</span> Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, <span class='add'>even</span> those that were numbered of them <span class='add'>were</span> seven thousand and five hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_23">23&#160;</span> The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_24">24&#160;</span> And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites <span class='add'>shall be</span> Eliasaph the son of Lael.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_25">25&#160;</span> And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation <span class='add'>shall be</span> the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="NU3_26">26&#160;</span> And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the door of the court, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And of Kohath <span class='add'>was</span> the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Kohathites.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_28">28&#160;</span> In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, <span class='add'>were</span> eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_29">29&#160;</span> The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_30">30&#160;</span> And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the Kohathites <span class='add'>shall be</span> Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_31">31&#160;</span> And their charge <span class='add'>shall be</span> the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_32">32&#160;</span> And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest <span class='add'>shall be</span> chief over the chief of the Levites, <span class='add'>and have</span> the oversight of them that keep the charge of the sanctuary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Of Merari <span class='add'>was</span> the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites: these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Merari.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_34">34&#160;</span> And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, <span class='add'>were</span> six thousand and two hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_35">35&#160;</span> And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari <span class='add'>was</span> Zuriel the son of Abihail: <span class='add'>these</span> shall pitch on the side of the tabernacle <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>northward.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_36">36&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>under</span> the custody and charge of the sons of Merari <span class='add'>shall be</span> the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all that serveth thereto,
<span class="verse" id="NU3_37">37&#160;</span> And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_38">38&#160;</span>¶ But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, <span class='add'>even</span> before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, <span class='add'>shall be</span> Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_39">39&#160;</span> All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, throughout their families, all the males from a month old and upward, <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and two thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_40">40&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_41">41&#160;</span> And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>) instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_42">42&#160;</span> And Moses numbered, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him, all the firstborn among the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_43">43&#160;</span> And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU3_44">44&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU3_45">45&#160;</span> Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_46">46&#160;</span> And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites;
<span class="verse" id="NU3_47">47&#160;</span> Thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take <span class='add'>them:</span> (<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the shekel <span class='add'>is</span> twenty gerahs:)
<span class="verse" id="NU3_48">48&#160;</span> And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons.
<span class="verse" id="NU3_49">49&#160;</span> And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and above them that were redeemed by the Levites:
<span class="verse" id="NU3_50">50&#160;</span> Of the firstborn of the children of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and threescore and five <span class='add'>shekels</span>, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
<span class="verse" id="NU3_51">51&#160;</span> And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_2">2&#160;</span> Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their families, by the house of their fathers,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_3">3&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_4">4&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>shall be</span> the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation, <span class='add'>about</span> the most holy things: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_6">6&#160;</span> And shall put thereon the covering of badgers’ skins, and shall spread over <span class='add'>it</span> a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_7">7&#160;</span> And upon the <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers to <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_8">8&#160;</span> And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put in the staves thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_9">9&#160;</span> And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>candlestick of the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and his snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_10">10&#160;</span> And they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put <span class='add'>it</span> upon a bar.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_11">11&#160;</span> And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put to the staves thereof:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_12">12&#160;</span> And they shall take all the instruments of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put <span class='add'>them</span> in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put <span class='add'>them</span> on a bar:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_13">13&#160;</span> And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_14">14&#160;</span> And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, <span class='add'>even</span> the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>basons, all the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers’ skins, and put to the staves of it.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_15">15&#160;</span> And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear <span class='add'>it:</span> but they shall not touch <span class='add'>any</span> holy thing, lest they die. These <span class='add'>things are</span> the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest <span class='add'>pertaineth</span> the oil for the light, and the <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sweet incense, and the daily meat offering, and the <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>anointing oil, <span class='add'>and</span> the oversight of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein <span class='add'>is</span>, in the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_18">18&#160;</span> Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_19">19&#160;</span> But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_20">20&#160;</span> But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_22">22&#160;</span> Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their families;
<span class="verse" id="NU4_23">23&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou number them; all that enter in <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_24">24&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve, and for <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>burdens:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_25">25&#160;</span> And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and the covering of the badgers’ skins that <span class='add'>is</span> above upon it, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_26">26&#160;</span> And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all that is made for them: so shall they serve.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_27">27&#160;</span> At the <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_28">28&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge <span class='add'>shall be</span> under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_29">29&#160;</span>¶ As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their families, by the house of their fathers;
<span class="verse" id="NU4_30">30&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth into the <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>service, to do the work of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_31">31&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the charge of their burden, according to all their service in the tabernacle of the congregation; <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets thereof,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_32">32&#160;</span> And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments, and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the instruments of the charge of their burden.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_33">33&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house of their fathers,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_35">35&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU4_36">36&#160;</span> And those that were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_37">37&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> they that were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_38">38&#160;</span> And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout their families, and by the house of their fathers,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_39">39&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_40">40&#160;</span> Even those that were numbered of them, throughout their families, by the <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>house of their fathers, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_41">41&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> they that were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of all that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU4_42">42&#160;</span>¶ And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_43">43&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_44">44&#160;</span> Even those that were numbered of them after their families, were three thousand and two hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_45">45&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>be</span> those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_46">46&#160;</span> All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the chief of Israel numbered, after their families, and after the house of their fathers,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_47">47&#160;</span> From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="NU4_48">48&#160;</span> Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore.
<span class="verse" id="NU4_49">49&#160;</span> According to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they were numbered by the hand of Moses, every one according to his service, and according to his burden: thus were they numbered of him, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU5_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU5_2">2&#160;</span> Command the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>leper, and every one that hath an <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>issue, and whosoever is defiled by the <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dead:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_3">3&#160;</span> Both male and female shall ye put out, without the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camps, in the midst whereof I dwell.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_4">4&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp: as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, so did the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU5_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU5_6">6&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and that person be guilty;
<span class="verse" id="NU5_7">7&#160;</span> Then they shall confess their sin which they have done: and he shall recompense his trespass <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth <span class='add'>part</span> thereof, and give <span class='add'>it</span> unto <span class='add'>him</span> against whom he hath trespassed.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_8">8&#160;</span> But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recompensed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> to the priest; beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made for him.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_9">9&#160;</span> And every <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel, which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_10">10&#160;</span> And every man’s hallowed things shall be his: whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it shall be <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU5_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU5_12">12&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man’s wife go aside, and commit a trespass against him,
<span class="verse" id="NU5_13">13&#160;</span> And a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and <span class='add'>there be</span> no witness against her, neither she be taken <span class='add'>with the manner;</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU5_14">14&#160;</span> And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_15">15&#160;</span> Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth <span class='add'>part</span> of an ephah of barley meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it <span class='add'>is</span> an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_16">16&#160;</span> And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_17">17&#160;</span> And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall take, and put <span class='add'>it</span> into the water:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_18">18&#160;</span> And the priest shall set the woman before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and uncover the woman’s head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands, which <span class='add'>is</span> the jealousy offering: and the priest shall have in his hand the bitter water that causeth the curse:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_19">19&#160;</span> And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>with another</span> instead of thy husband, be thou free from this bitter water that causeth the curse:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_20">20&#160;</span> But if thou hast gone aside <span class='add'>to another</span> instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and some man <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>have lain with thee beside thine husband:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_21">21&#160;</span> Then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth make thy thigh to <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rot, and thy belly to swell;
<span class="verse" id="NU5_22">22&#160;</span> And this water that causeth the curse shall go into thy bowels, to make <span class='add'>thy</span> belly to swell, and <span class='add'>thy</span> thigh to rot: And the woman shall say, Amen, amen.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_23">23&#160;</span> And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot <span class='add'>them</span> out with the bitter water:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_24">24&#160;</span> And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, <span class='add'>and become</span> bitter.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_25">25&#160;</span> Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the woman’s hand, and shall wave the offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and offer it upon the altar:
<span class="verse" id="NU5_26">26&#160;</span> And the priest shall take an handful of the offering, <span class='add'>even</span> the memorial thereof, and burn <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar, and afterward shall cause the woman to drink the water.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_27">27&#160;</span> And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span>, if she be defiled, and have done trespass against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, <span class='add'>and become</span> bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and the woman shall be a curse among her people.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_28">28&#160;</span> And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be free, and shall conceive seed.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_29">29&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside <span class='add'>to another</span> instead of her husband, and is defiled;
<span class="verse" id="NU5_30">30&#160;</span> Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall set the woman before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law.
<span class="verse" id="NU5_31">31&#160;</span> Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman shall bear her iniquity.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU6_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU6_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shall <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>separate <span class='add'>themselves</span> to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate <span class='add'>themselves</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_3">3&#160;</span> He shall separate <span class='add'>himself</span> from wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_4">4&#160;</span> All the days of his <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>separation shall he eat nothing that is made of the <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>vine tree, from the kernels even to the husk.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_5">5&#160;</span> All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>razor come upon his head: until the days be fulfilled, in the which he separateth <span class='add'>himself</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he shall be holy, <span class='add'>and</span> shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_6">6&#160;</span> All the days that he separateth <span class='add'>himself</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> he shall come at no dead body.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_7">7&#160;</span> He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consecration of his God <span class='add'>is</span> upon his head.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_8">8&#160;</span> All the days of his separation he <span class='add'>is</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_9">9&#160;</span> And if any man die very suddenly by him, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration; then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shall he shave it.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_10">10&#160;</span> And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_11">11&#160;</span> And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make an atonement for him, for that he sinned by the dead, and shall hallow his head that same day.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_12">12&#160;</span> And he shall consecrate unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the days of his separation, and shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespass offering: but the days that were before shall <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be lost, because his separation was defiled.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU6_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the Nazarite, when the days of his separation are fulfilled: he shall be brought unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_14">14&#160;</span> And he shall offer his offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a burnt offering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for a sin offering, and one <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>ram without blemish for peace offerings,
<span class="verse" id="NU6_15">15&#160;</span> And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat offering, and their drink offerings.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_16">16&#160;</span> And the priest shall bring <span class='add'>them</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and shall offer his sin offering, and his burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_17">17&#160;</span> And he shall offer the ram <span class='add'>for</span> a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with the basket of unleavened bread: the priest shall offer also his meat offering, and his drink offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall take the hair of the head of his separation, and put <span class='add'>it</span> in the fire which <span class='add'>is</span> under the sacrifice of the peace offerings.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_19">19&#160;</span> And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put <span class='add'>them</span> upon the hands of the Nazarite, after <span class='add'>the hair of</span> his separation is shaven:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_20">20&#160;</span> And the priest shall wave them <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: this <span class='add'>is</span> holy for the priest, with the wave breast and heave shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may drink wine.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_21">21&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, <span class='add'>and of</span> his offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for his separation, beside <span class='add'>that</span> that his hand shall get: according to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after the law of his separation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU6_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU6_23">23&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them,
<span class="verse" id="NU6_24">24&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bless thee, and keep thee:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee:
<span class="verse" id="NU6_26">26&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.
<span class="verse" id="NU6_27">27&#160;</span> And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel; and I will bless them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>set up the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and all the instruments thereof, both the altar and all the vessels thereof, and had anointed them, and sanctified them;
<span class="verse" id="NU7_2">2&#160;</span> That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who <span class='add'>were</span> the princes of the tribes, <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and were over them that were numbered, offered:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_3">3&#160;</span> And they brought their offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU7_5">5&#160;</span> Take <span class='add'>it</span> of them, that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man according to his service.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_7">7&#160;</span> Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, according to their service:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_8">8&#160;</span> And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, according unto their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_9">9&#160;</span> But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them <span class='add'>was that</span> they should bear upon their shoulders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the princes offered for dedicating of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the princes offered their offering before the altar.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, They shall offer their offering, each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_13">13&#160;</span> And his offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight thereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them <span class='add'>were</span> full of fine flour mingled with oil for a <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_14">14&#160;</span> One spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span> of gold, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_15">15&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_16">16&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_17">17&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_18">18&#160;</span>¶ On the second day Nethaneel the son of Zuar, prince of Issachar, did offer:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_19">19&#160;</span> He offered <span class='add'>for</span> his offering one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_20">20&#160;</span> One spoon of gold of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_21">21&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_22">22&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_23">23&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_24">24&#160;</span>¶ On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun, <span class='add'>did offer:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_25">25&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_26">26&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_27">27&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_28">28&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_29">29&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Eliab the son of Helon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_30">30&#160;</span>¶ On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben, <span class='add'>did offer:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_31">31&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of the weight of an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_32">32&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_33">33&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_34">34&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_35">35&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_36">36&#160;</span>¶ On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon, <span class='add'>did offer:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_37">37&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_38">38&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_39">39&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_40">40&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_41">41&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_42">42&#160;</span>¶ On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, <span class='add'>offered:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_43">43&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, a silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_44">44&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_45">45&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_46">46&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_47">47&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_48">48&#160;</span>¶ On the seventh day Elishama the son of Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim, <span class='add'>offered:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_49">49&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_50">50&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_51">51&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_52">52&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_53">53&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_54">54&#160;</span>¶ On the eighth day <span class='add'>offered</span> Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manasseh:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_55">55&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of the weight of an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_56">56&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_57">57&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_58">58&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_59">59&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_60">60&#160;</span>¶ On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin, <span class='add'>offered:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_61">61&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_62">62&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_63">63&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_64">64&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_65">65&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_66">66&#160;</span>¶ On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan, <span class='add'>offered:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_67">67&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_68">68&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_69">69&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_70">70&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_71">71&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_72">72&#160;</span>¶ On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children of Asher, <span class='add'>offered:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_73">73&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_74">74&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_75">75&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_76">76&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_77">77&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_78">78&#160;</span>¶ On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali, <span class='add'>offered:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU7_79">79&#160;</span> His offering <span class='add'>was</span> one silver charger, the weight whereof <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_80">80&#160;</span> One golden spoon of ten <span class='add'>shekels</span>, full of incense:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_81">81&#160;</span> One young bullock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_82">82&#160;</span> One kid of the goats for a sin offering:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_83">83&#160;</span> And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this <span class='add'>was</span> the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_84">84&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>was</span> the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spoons of gold:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_85">85&#160;</span> Each charger of silver <span class='add'>weighing</span> an hundred and thirty <span class='add'>shekels</span>, each bowl seventy: all the silver vessels <span class='add'>weighed</span> two thousand and four hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span>, after the shekel of the sanctuary:
<span class="verse" id="NU7_86">86&#160;</span> The golden spoons <span class='add'>were</span> twelve, full of incense, <span class='add'>weighing</span> ten <span class='add'>shekels</span> apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary: all the gold of the spoons <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and twenty <span class='add'>shekels</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_87">87&#160;</span> All the oxen for the burnt offering <span class='add'>were</span> twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat offering: and the kids of the goats for sin offering twelve.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_88">88&#160;</span> And all the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace offerings <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. This <span class='add'>was</span> the dedication of the altar, after that it was anointed.
<span class="verse" id="NU7_89">89&#160;</span> And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to speak with <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that <span class='add'>was</span> upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims: and he spake unto him.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU8_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU8_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When thou <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the candlestick.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_3">3&#160;</span> And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And this work of the candlestick <span class='add'>was of</span> beaten gold, unto the shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>beaten work: according unto the pattern which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had shewed Moses, so he made the candlestick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU8_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU8_6">6&#160;</span> Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_7">7&#160;</span> And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>let them shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and <span class='add'>so</span> make themselves clean.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_8">8&#160;</span> Then let them take a young bullock with his meat offering, <span class='add'>even</span> fine flour mingled with oil, and another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_9">9&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole assembly of the children of Israel together:
<span class="verse" id="NU8_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring the Levites before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites:
<span class="verse" id="NU8_11">11&#160;</span> And Aaron shall <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offer the Levites before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>for</span> an <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offering of the children of Israel, that <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>they may execute the service of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_12">12&#160;</span> And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering, and the other <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering, unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to make an atonement for the Levites.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_13">13&#160;</span> And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them <span class='add'>for</span> an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_14">14&#160;</span> Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mine.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_15">15&#160;</span> And after that shall the Levites go in to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and offer them <span class='add'>for</span> an offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_16">16&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>are</span> wholly given unto me from among the children of Israel; instead of such as open every womb, <span class='add'>even instead of</span> the firstborn of all the children of Israel, have I taken them unto me.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For all the firstborn of the children of Israel <span class='add'>are</span> mine, <span class='add'>both</span> man and beast: on the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_18">18&#160;</span> And I have taken the Levites for all the firstborn of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_19">19&#160;</span> And I have given the Levites <span class='add'>as</span> <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an atonement for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_20">20&#160;</span> And Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the children of Israel, did to the Levites according unto all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_21">21&#160;</span> And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them <span class='add'>as</span> an offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them.
<span class="verse" id="NU8_22">22&#160;</span> And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron, and before his sons: as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU8_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU8_24">24&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is it</span> that <span class='add'>belongeth</span> unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall go in <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU8_25">25&#160;</span> And from the age of fifty years they shall <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cease waiting upon the service <span class='add'>thereof</span>, and shall serve no more:
<span class="verse" id="NU8_26">26&#160;</span> But shall minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charge.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU9_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU9_2">2&#160;</span> Let the children of Israel also keep <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the passover at his appointed season.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_3">3&#160;</span> In the fourteenth day of this month, <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at even, ye shall keep it in his appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies thereof, shall ye keep it.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_4">4&#160;</span> And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep the passover.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_5">5&#160;</span> And they kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month at even in the wilderness of Sinai: according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so did the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU9_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the passover on that day: and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day:
<span class="verse" id="NU9_7">7&#160;</span> And those men said unto him, We <span class='add'>are</span> defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in his appointed season among the children of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="NU9_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses said unto them, Stand still, and I will hear what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will command concerning you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU9_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU9_10">10&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or <span class='add'>be</span> in a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_11">11&#160;</span> The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep it, <span class='add'>and</span> eat it with unleavened bread and bitter <span class='add'>herbs</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_12">12&#160;</span> They shall leave none of it unto the morning, <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>nor break any bone of it: according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep it.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_13">13&#160;</span> But the man that <span class='add'>is</span> clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from among his people: because he brought not the offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in his appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_14">14&#160;</span> And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; according to the ordinance of the passover, and according to the manner thereof, so shall he do: <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall have one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU9_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, <span class='add'>namely</span>, the tent of the testimony: and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the appearance of fire, until the morning.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_16">16&#160;</span> So it was alway: the cloud covered it <span class='add'>by day</span>, and the appearance of fire by night.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_17">17&#160;</span> And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_18">18&#160;</span> At the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the children of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they pitched: <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>their tents.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_19">19&#160;</span> And when the cloud <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>tarried long upon the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and journeyed not.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_20">20&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>so</span> it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle; according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they abode in their tents, and according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they journeyed.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_21">21&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>so</span> it was, when the cloud <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abode from even unto the morning, and <span class='add'>that</span> the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed: whether <span class='add'>it was</span> by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they journeyed.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_22">22&#160;</span>Or <span class='add'>whether it were</span> two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken up, they journeyed.
<span class="verse" id="NU9_23">23&#160;</span> At the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they rested in the tents, and at the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they journeyed: they kept the charge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, at the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU10_2">2&#160;</span> Make thee two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou mayest use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_3">3&#160;</span> And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble themselves to thee at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_4">4&#160;</span> And if they blow <span class='add'>but</span> with one <span class='add'>trumpet</span>, then the princes, <span class='add'>which are</span> heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_5">5&#160;</span> When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts shall go forward.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_6">6&#160;</span> When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on the south side shall take their journey: they shall blow an alarm for their journeys.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_7">7&#160;</span> But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_8">8&#160;</span> And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your generations.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_9">9&#160;</span> And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_10">10&#160;</span> Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> of the second month, in the second year, that the cloud was taken up from off the tabernacle of the testimony.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_12">12&#160;</span> And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_13">13&#160;</span> And they first took their journey according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>In the first <span class='add'>place</span> went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah according to their armies: and over his host <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_15">15&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Issachar <span class='add'>was</span> Nethaneel the son of Zuar.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_16">16&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun <span class='add'>was</span> Eliab the son of Helon.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_17">17&#160;</span> And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their armies: and over his host <span class='add'>was</span> Elizur the son of Shedeur.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_19">19&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon <span class='add'>was</span> Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_20">20&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad <span class='add'>was</span> Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_21">21&#160;</span> And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sanctuary: and <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>the other</span> did set up the tabernacle against they came.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward according to their armies: and over his host <span class='add'>was</span> Elishama the son of Ammihud.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_23">23&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manasseh <span class='add'>was</span> Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_24">24&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin <span class='add'>was</span> Abidan the son of Gideoni. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward, <span class='add'>which was</span> the rereward of all the camps throughout their hosts: and over his host <span class='add'>was</span> Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_26">26&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher <span class='add'>was</span> Pagiel the son of Ocran.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_27">27&#160;</span> And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali <span class='add'>was</span> Ahira the son of Enan.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Thus <span class='add'> were</span> the journeyings of the children of Israel according to their armies, when they set forward.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses’ father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken good concerning Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_30">30&#160;</span> And he said unto him, I will not go; but I will depart to mine own land, and to my kindred.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_31">31&#160;</span> And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_32">32&#160;</span> And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that what goodness the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall do unto us, the same will we do unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU10_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And they departed from the mount of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> three days’ journey: and the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went before them in the three days’ journey, to search out a resting place for them.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_34">34&#160;</span> And the cloud of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> upon them by day, when they went out of the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_35">35&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rise up, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee.
<span class="verse" id="NU10_36">36&#160;</span> And when it rested, he said, Return, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, unto the <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>many thousands of Israel.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU11_1">1&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> the people <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>complained, <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it displeased the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heard <span class='add'>it;</span> and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> burnt <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>among them, and consumed <span class='add'>them that were</span> in the uttermost parts of the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_2">2&#160;</span> And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the fire <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>was quenched.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_3">3&#160;</span> And he called the name of the place <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Taberah: because the fire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> burnt among them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU11_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And the <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mixt multitude that <span class='add'>was</span> among them <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fell a lusting: and the children of Israel also <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wept again, and said, <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who shall give us flesh to eat?
<span class="verse" id="NU11_5">5&#160;</span> We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick:
<span class="verse" id="NU11_6">6&#160;</span> But now our soul <span class='add'>is</span> dried away: <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing at all, beside this manna, <span class='add'>before</span> our eyes.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the manna <span class='add'>was</span> as coriander seed, and the <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>colour thereof as the colour of bdellium.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> the people went about, and gathered <span class='add'>it</span>, and ground <span class='add'>it</span> in mills, or beat <span class='add'>it</span> in a mortar, and baked <span class='add'>it</span> in pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_9">9&#160;</span> And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU11_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every man in the door of his tent: and the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_11">11&#160;</span> And Moses said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
<span class="verse" id="NU11_12">12&#160;</span> Have I conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers?
<span class="verse" id="NU11_13">13&#160;</span> Whence should I have flesh to give unto all this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_14">14&#160;</span> I am not able to bear all this people alone, because <span class='add'>it is</span> too heavy for me.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_15">15&#160;</span> And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not see my wretchedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU11_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and officers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thee.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_17">17&#160;</span> And I will come down and talk with thee there: and I will take of the spirit which <span class='add'>is</span> upon thee, and will put <span class='add'>it</span> upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou bear <span class='add'>it</span> not thyself alone.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_18">18&#160;</span> And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? for <span class='add'>it was</span> well with us in Egypt: therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_19">19&#160;</span> Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days;
<span class="verse" id="NU11_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> even a <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye have despised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> among you, and have wept before him, saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?
<span class="verse" id="NU11_21">21&#160;</span> And Moses said, The people, among whom I <span class='add'>am</span>, <span class='add'>are</span> six hundred thousand footmen; and thou hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_22">22&#160;</span> Shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?
<span class="verse" id="NU11_23">23&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Is the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> hand waxed short? thou shalt see now whether my word shall come to pass unto thee or not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU11_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_25">25&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and took of the spirit that <span class='add'>was</span> upon him, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> unto the seventy elders: and it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span>, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_26">26&#160;</span> But there remained two <span class='add'>of the</span> men in the camp, the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested upon them; and they <span class='add'>were</span> of them that were written, but went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_27">27&#160;</span> And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_28">28&#160;</span> And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, <span class='add'>one</span> of his young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_29">29&#160;</span> And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> people were prophets, <span class='add'>and</span> that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> would put his spirit upon them!
<span class="verse" id="NU11_30">30&#160;</span> And Moses gat him into the camp, he and the elders of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU11_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And there went forth a <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wind from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and brought quails from the sea, and let <span class='add'>them</span> fall by the camp, <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>as it were a day’s journey on this side, and as it were a day’s journey on the other side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits <span class='add'>high</span> upon the face of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_32">32&#160;</span> And the people stood up all that day, and all <span class='add'>that</span> night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and they spread <span class='add'>them</span> all abroad for themselves round about the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_33">33&#160;</span> And while the <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>flesh <span class='add'>was</span> yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against the people, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote the people with a very great plague.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_34">34&#160;</span> And he called the name of that place <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Kibroth-hattaavah: because there they buried the people that lusted.
<span class="verse" id="NU11_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> the people journeyed from Kibroth-hattaavah unto Hazeroth; and <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abode at Hazeroth.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU12_1">1&#160;</span> And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ethiopian woman whom he had married: for he had <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>married an Ethiopian woman.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_2">2&#160;</span> And they said, Hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> heard <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_3">3&#160;</span>(Now the man Moses <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>very meek, above all the men which <span class='add'>were</span> upon the face of the earth.) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU12_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake suddenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they three came out.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came down in the pillar of the cloud, and stood <span class='add'>in</span> the door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_6">6&#160;</span> And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, <span class='add'>I</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will make myself known unto him in a vision, <span class='add'>and</span> will speak unto him in a dream.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_7">7&#160;</span> My servant Moses <span class='add'>is</span> not so, <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>who <span class='add'>is</span> faithful in all mine house.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_8">8&#160;</span> With him will I speak <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses?
<span class="verse" id="NU12_9">9&#160;</span> And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against them; and he departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU12_10">10&#160;</span> And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam <span class='add'>became</span> leprous, <span class='add'>white</span> as snow: and Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, <span class='add'>she was</span> leprous.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_11">11&#160;</span> And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done foolishly, and wherein we have sinned.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_12">12&#160;</span> Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of his mother’s womb.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_13">13&#160;</span> And Moses cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU12_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in <span class='add'>again</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_15">15&#160;</span> And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in <span class='add'>again</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU12_16">16&#160;</span> And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderness of Paran.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU13_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU13_2">2&#160;</span> Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a ruler among them.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_3">3&#160;</span> And Moses by the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent them from the wilderness of Paran: all those men <span class='add'> were</span> heads of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_4">4&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>were</span> their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_5">5&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_6">6&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_7">7&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_8">8&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_9">9&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_10">10&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_11">11&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Joseph, <span class='add'>namely</span>, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_12">12&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_13">13&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_14">14&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_15">15&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_16">16&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU13_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto them, Get you up this <span class='add'>way</span> southward, and go up into the mountain:
<span class="verse" id="NU13_18">18&#160;</span> And see the land, what it <span class='add'>is;</span> and the people that dwelleth therein, whether they <span class='add'>be</span> strong or weak, few or many;
<span class="verse" id="NU13_19">19&#160;</span> And what the land <span class='add'>is</span> that they dwell in, whether it <span class='add'>be</span> good or bad; and what cities <span class='add'>they be</span> that they dwell in, whether in tents, or in strong holds;
<span class="verse" id="NU13_20">20&#160;</span> And what the land <span class='add'>is</span>, whether it <span class='add'>be</span> fat or lean, whether there be wood therein, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time <span class='add'>was</span> the time of the firstripe grapes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU13_21">21&#160;</span>¶ So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderness of Zin unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_22">22&#160;</span> And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, <span class='add'>were</span>. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)
<span class="verse" id="NU13_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And they came unto the <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brook of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bare it between two upon a staff; and <span class='add'>they brought</span> of the pomegranates, and of the figs.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_24">24&#160;</span> The place was called the <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>brook <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Eshcol, because of the cluster of grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_25">25&#160;</span> And they returned from searching of the land after forty days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU13_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto all the congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_27">27&#160;</span> And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>milk and honey; and this <span class='add'>is</span> the fruit of it.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_28">28&#160;</span> Nevertheless the people <span class='add'>be</span> strong that dwell in the land, and the cities <span class='add'>are</span> walled, <span class='add'>and</span> very great: and moreover we saw the children of Anak there.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_29">29&#160;</span> The Amalekites dwell in the land of the south: and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dwell in the mountains: and the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_30">30&#160;</span> And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_31">31&#160;</span> But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up against the people; for they <span class='add'>are</span> stronger than we.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_32">32&#160;</span> And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, <span class='add'>is</span> a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the people that we saw in it <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>men of a great stature.
<span class="verse" id="NU13_33">33&#160;</span> And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, <span class='add'>which come</span> of the giants: and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_1">1&#160;</span> And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_2">2&#160;</span> And all the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderness!
<span class="verse" id="NU14_3">3&#160;</span> And wherefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought us unto this land, to fall by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it not better for us to return into Egypt?
<span class="verse" id="NU14_4">4&#160;</span> And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_5">5&#160;</span> Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, <span class='add'>which were</span> of them that searched the land, rent their clothes:
<span class="verse" id="NU14_7">7&#160;</span> And they spake unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to search it, <span class='add'>is</span> an exceeding good land.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_8">8&#160;</span> If the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delight in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_9">9&#160;</span> Only rebel not ye against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, neither fear ye the people of the land; for they <span class='add'>are</span> bread for us: their <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>defence is departed from them, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with us: fear them not.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_10">10&#160;</span> But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before all the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe me, for all the signs which I have shewed among them?
<span class="verse" id="NU14_12">12&#160;</span> I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Then the Egyptians shall hear <span class='add'>it</span>, (for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;)
<span class="verse" id="NU14_14">14&#160;</span> And they will tell <span class='add'>it</span> to the inhabitants of this land: <span class='add'>for</span> they have heard that thou <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>art</span> among this people, that thou <span class='nd'>LORD</span> art seen face to face, and <span class='add'>that</span> <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thy cloud standeth over them, and <span class='add'>that</span> thou goest before them, by day time in a pillar of a cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Now <span class='add'>if</span> thou shalt kill <span class='add'>all</span> this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU14_16">16&#160;</span> Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was not <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>able to bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_17">17&#160;</span> And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU14_18">18&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>longsuffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and by no means clearing <span class='add'>the guilty</span>, <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth <span class='add'>generation</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_19">19&#160;</span> Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>until now.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, I have pardoned according to thy word:
<span class="verse" id="NU14_21">21&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as</span> truly <span class='add'>as</span> I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_22">22&#160;</span> Because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice;
<span class="verse" id="NU14_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Surely they shall not see the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me see it:
<span class="verse" id="NU14_24">24&#160;</span> But my servant <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his seed shall possess it.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_25">25&#160;</span>(Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.) To morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the Red sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU14_27">27&#160;</span>How long <span class='add'>shall I bear with</span> this evil congregation, which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_28">28&#160;</span> Say unto them, <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'> As truly as</span> I live, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you:
<span class="verse" id="NU14_29">29&#160;</span> Your carcases shall fall in this wilderness; and all that were <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, which have murmured against me,
<span class="verse" id="NU14_30">30&#160;</span> Doubtless ye shall not come into the land, <span class='add'>concerning</span> which I <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sware to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_31">31&#160;</span> But your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have despised.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_32">32&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for</span> you, your carcases, they shall fall in this wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_33">33&#160;</span> And your children shall <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wander in the wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_34">34&#160;</span> After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>forty days, each day for a year, shall ye bear your iniquities, <span class='add'>even</span> forty years, and ye shall know my <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>breach of promise.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_35">35&#160;</span> I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have said, I will surely do it unto all this evil congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_36">36&#160;</span> And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a slander upon the land,
<span class="verse" id="NU14_37">37&#160;</span> Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>died by the plague before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_38">38&#160;</span> But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, <span class='add'>which were</span> of the men that went to search the land, lived <span class='add'>still</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_39">39&#160;</span> And Moses told these sayings unto all the children of Israel: and the people mourned greatly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU14_40">40&#160;</span>¶ And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>be here</span>, and will go up unto the place which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath promised: for we have sinned.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_41">41&#160;</span> And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgress the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? but it shall not prosper.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_42">42&#160;</span> Go not up, for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> not among you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_43">43&#160;</span> For the Amalekites and the Canaanites <span class='add'>are</span> there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword: because ye are turned away from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not be with you.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_44">44&#160;</span> But they presumed to go up unto the hill top: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and Moses, departed not out of the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU14_45">45&#160;</span> Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in that hill, and smote them, and <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>discomfited them, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Hormah.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU15_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you,
<span class="verse" id="NU15_3">3&#160;</span> And will make an offering by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>performing a vow, or in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts, to make a <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, of the herd, or of the flock:
<span class="verse" id="NU15_4">4&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall he that offereth his offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bring a meat offering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin of oil.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_5">5&#160;</span> And the fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin of wine for a drink offering shalt thou prepare with the burnt offering or sacrifice, for one lamb.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_6">6&#160;</span> Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare <span class='add'>for</span> a meat offering two tenth deals of flour mingled with the third <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin of oil.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_7">7&#160;</span> And for a drink offering thou shalt offer the third <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin of wine, <span class='add'>for</span> a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_8">8&#160;</span> And when thou preparest a bullock <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering, or <span class='add'>for</span> a sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="NU15_9">9&#160;</span> Then shall he bring with a bullock a meat offering of three tenth deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring for a drink offering half an hin of wine, <span class='add'>for</span> an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_11">11&#160;</span> Thus shall it be done for one bullock, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_12">12&#160;</span> According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to their number.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_13">13&#160;</span> All that are born of the country shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_14">14&#160;</span> And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever <span class='add'>be</span> among you in your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as ye do, so he shall do.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> One ordinance <span class='add'>shall be both</span> for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger that sojourneth <span class='add'>with you</span>, an ordinance for ever in your generations: as ye <span class='add'>are</span>, so shall the stranger be before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_16">16&#160;</span> One law and one manner shall be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU15_18">18&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land whither I bring you,
<span class="verse" id="NU15_19">19&#160;</span> Then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up an heave offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_20">20&#160;</span> Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough <span class='add'>for</span> an heave offering: as <span class='add'>ye do</span> the heave offering of the threshingfloor, so shall ye heave it.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_21">21&#160;</span> Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> an heave offering in your generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And if ye have erred, and not observed all these commandments, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken unto Moses,
<span class="verse" id="NU15_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded <span class='add'>Moses</span>, and henceforward among your generations;
<span class="verse" id="NU15_24">24&#160;</span>Then it shall be, if <span class='add'>ought</span> be committed by ignorance <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with his meat offering, and his drink offering, according to the <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_25">25&#160;</span> And the priest shall make an atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven them; for it <span class='add'>is</span> ignorance: and they shall bring their offering, a sacrifice made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and their sin offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for their ignorance:
<span class="verse" id="NU15_26">26&#160;</span> And it shall be forgiven all the congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them; seeing all the people <span class='add'>were</span> in ignorance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shall bring a she goat of the first year for a sin offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_28">28&#160;</span> And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he sinneth by ignorance before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to make an atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_29">29&#160;</span> Ye shall have one law for him that <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sinneth through ignorance, <span class='add'>both for</span> him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_30">30&#160;</span>¶ But the soul that doeth <span class='add'>ought</span> <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>presumptuously, <span class='add'>whether he be</span> born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_31">31&#160;</span> Because he hath despised the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and hath broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the sabbath day.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_33">33&#160;</span> And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_34">34&#160;</span> And they put him <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_35">35&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, The man shall be surely put to death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones without the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_36">36&#160;</span> And all the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU15_37">37&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU15_38">38&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue:
<span class="verse" id="NU15_39">39&#160;</span> And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring:
<span class="verse" id="NU15_40">40&#160;</span> That ye may remember, and do all my commandments, and be holy unto your God.
<span class="verse" id="NU15_41">41&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_1">1&#160;</span> Now <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took <span class='add'>men:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_2">2&#160;</span> And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>famous in the congregation, men of renown:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_3">3&#160;</span> And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>Ye take</span> too much upon you, seeing all the congregation <span class='add'>are</span> holy, every one of them, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="NU16_4">4&#160;</span> And when Moses heard <span class='add'>it</span>, he fell upon his face:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_5">5&#160;</span> And he spake unto Korah and unto all his company, saying, Even to morrow the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will shew who <span class='add'>are</span> his, and <span class='add'>who is</span> holy; and will cause <span class='add'>him</span> to come near unto him: even <span class='add'>him</span> whom he hath chosen will he cause to come near unto him.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_6">6&#160;</span> This do; Take you censers, Korah, and all his company;
<span class="verse" id="NU16_7">7&#160;</span> And put fire therein, and put incense in them before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to morrow: and it shall be <span class='add'>that</span> the man whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth choose, he <span class='add'>shall be</span> holy: <span class='add'>ye take</span> too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_8">8&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Seemeth it but</span> a small thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them?
<span class="verse" id="NU16_10">10&#160;</span> And he hath brought thee near <span class='add'>to him</span>, and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee: and seek ye the priesthood also?
<span class="verse" id="NU16_11">11&#160;</span> For which cause <span class='add'>both</span> thou and all thy company <span class='add'>are</span> gathered together against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and what <span class='add'>is</span> Aaron, that ye murmur against him? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We will not come up:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is it</span> a small thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us?
<span class="verse" id="NU16_14">14&#160;</span> Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou <a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>put out the eyes of these men? we will not come up.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_15">15&#160;</span> And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Respect not thou their offering: I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt one of them.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_16">16&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou, and they, and Aaron, to morrow:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_17">17&#160;</span> And take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and Aaron, each <span class='add'>of you</span> his censer.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_18">18&#160;</span> And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood in the door of the tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_19">19&#160;</span> And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto all the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU16_21">21&#160;</span> Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_22">22&#160;</span> And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU16_24">24&#160;</span> Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_25">25&#160;</span> And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_26">26&#160;</span> And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_27">27&#160;</span> So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood in the door of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little children.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_28">28&#160;</span> And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sent me to do all these works; for <span class='add'>I have</span> not <span class='add'>done them</span> of mine own mind.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_29">29&#160;</span> If these men die <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; <span class='add'>then</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not sent me.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_30">30&#160;</span> But if the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swallow them up, with all that <span class='add'>appertain</span> unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_31">31&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And it came to pass, as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave asunder that <span class='add'>was</span> under them:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_32">32&#160;</span> And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that <span class='add'>appertained</span> unto Korah, and all <span class='add'>their</span> goods.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_33">33&#160;</span>They, and all that <span class='add'>appertained</span> to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_34">34&#160;</span> And all Israel that <span class='add'>were</span> round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up <span class='add'>also</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_35">35&#160;</span> And there came out a fire from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU16_37">37&#160;</span> Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder; for they are hallowed.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_38">38&#160;</span> The censers of these sinners against their own souls, let them make them broad plates <span class='add'>for</span> a covering of the altar: for they offered them before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, therefore they are hallowed: and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_39">39&#160;</span> And Eleazar the priest took the brasen censers, wherewith they that were burnt had offered; and they were made broad <span class='add'>plates for</span> a covering of the altar:
<span class="verse" id="NU16_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='add'>To be</span> a memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which <span class='add'>is</span> not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer incense before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; that he be not as Korah, and as his company: as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to him by the hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_41">41&#160;</span>¶ But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_42">42&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_43">43&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_44">44&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU16_45">45&#160;</span> Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And they fell upon their faces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU16_46">46&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone out from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; the plague is begun.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_47">47&#160;</span> And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_48">48&#160;</span> And he stood between the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_49">49&#160;</span> Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.
<span class="verse" id="NU16_50">50&#160;</span> And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the plague was stayed.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU17_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU17_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod according to the house of <span class='add'>their</span> fathers, of all their princes according to the house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man’s name upon his rod.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt write Aaron’s name upon the rod of Levi: for one rod <span class='add'>shall be</span> for the head of the house of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_4">4&#160;</span> And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation before the testimony, <a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>where I will meet with you.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_5">5&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> the man’s rod, whom I shall choose, shall blossom: and I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU17_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of their princes gave him <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a rod apiece, for each prince one, according to their fathers’ houses, <span class='add'>even</span> twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron <span class='add'>was</span> among their rods.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_7">7&#160;</span> And Moses laid up the rods before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the tabernacle of witness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU17_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that on the morrow Moses went into the tabernacle of witness; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_9">9&#160;</span> And Moses brought out all the rods from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto all the children of Israel: and they looked, and took every man his rod. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU17_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Bring <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aaron’s rod again before the testimony, to be kept for a token against the <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>rebels; and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_11">11&#160;</span> And Moses did <span class='add'>so:</span> as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him, so did he.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_12">12&#160;</span> And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, we all perish.
<span class="verse" id="NU17_13">13&#160;</span> Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall die: shall we be consumed with dying?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU18_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father’s house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_2">2&#160;</span> And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou with thee, that they may be joined unto thee, and minister unto thee: but thou and thy sons with thee <span class='add'>shall minister</span> before the tabernacle of witness.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_3">3&#160;</span> And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tabernacle: only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the sanctuary and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_4">4&#160;</span> And they shall be joined unto thee, and keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, for all the service of the tabernacle: and a stranger shall not come nigh unto you.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_5">5&#160;</span> And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_6">6&#160;</span> And I, behold, I have <a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel: to you <span class='add'>they are</span> given <span class='add'>as</span> a gift for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest’s office for every thing of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shall serve: I have given your priest’s office <span class='add'>unto you</span> as a service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU18_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee the charge of mine heave offerings of all the hallowed things of the children of Israel; unto thee have I given them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_9">9&#160;</span> This shall be thine of the most holy things, <span class='add'>reserved</span> from the fire: every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render unto me, <span class='add'>shall be</span> most holy for thee and for thy sons.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_10">10&#160;</span> In the most holy <span class='add'>place</span> shalt thou eat it; every male shall eat it: it shall be holy unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_11">11&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> thine; the heave offering of their gift, with all the wave offerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_12">12&#160;</span> All the <a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shall offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, them have I given thee.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shall bring unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, shall be thine; every one that is clean in thine house shall eat <span class='add'>of</span> it.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Every thing devoted in Israel shall be thine.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_15">15&#160;</span> Every thing that openeth <a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the matrix in all flesh, which they bring unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>whether it be</span> of men or beasts, shall be thine: nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redeem.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_16">16&#160;</span> And those that are to be redeemed from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which <span class='add'>is</span> twenty gerahs.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_17">17&#160;</span> But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they <span class='add'>are</span> holy: thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat <span class='add'>for</span> an offering made by fire, for a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_18">18&#160;</span> And the flesh of them shall be thine, as the <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wave breast and as the right shoulder are thine.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_19">19&#160;</span> All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, have I given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: it <span class='add'>is</span> a covenant of salt for ever before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto thee and to thy seed with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU18_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: <a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> thy part and thine inheritance among the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_21">21&#160;</span> And, behold, I have given the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, <span class='add'>even</span> the service of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_22">22&#160;</span> Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>and die.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_23">23&#160;</span> But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children of Israel they have no inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_24">24&#160;</span> But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer <span class='add'>as</span> an heave offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I have given to the Levites to inherit: therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU18_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU18_26">26&#160;</span> Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up an heave offering of it for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> a tenth <span class='add'>part</span> of the tithe.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_27">27&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>this</span> your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you, as though <span class='add'>it were</span> the corn of the threshingfloor, and as the fulness of the winepress.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_28">28&#160;</span> Thus ye also shall offer an heave offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of all your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shall give thereof the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> heave offering to Aaron the priest.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_29">29&#160;</span> Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, of all the <a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>best thereof, <span class='add'>even</span> the hallowed part thereof out of it.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshingfloor, and as the increase of the winepress.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_31">31&#160;</span> And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households: for it <span class='add'>is</span> your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU18_32">32&#160;</span> And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it: neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU19_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU19_2">2&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the ordinance of the law which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, wherein <span class='add'>is</span> no blemish, <span class='add'>and</span> upon which never came yoke:
<span class="verse" id="NU19_3">3&#160;</span> And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her <a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>forth without the camp, and <span class='add'>one</span> shall slay her before his face:
<span class="verse" id="NU19_4">4&#160;</span> And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and <a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seven times:
<span class="verse" id="NU19_5">5&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> shall burn the heifer in his sight; <a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn:
<span class="verse" id="NU19_6">6&#160;</span> And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_7">7&#160;</span> Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_8">8&#160;</span> And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the even.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_9">9&#160;</span> And a man <span class='add'>that is</span> clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay <span class='add'>them</span> up without the camp in a clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of separation: it <span class='add'>is</span> a purification for sin.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_10">10&#160;</span> And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU19_11">11&#160;</span>¶ He that toucheth the dead body of any <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>man shall be unclean seven days.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_12">12&#160;</span> He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean: but if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_13">13&#160;</span> Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his uncleanness <span class='add'>is</span> yet upon him.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_14">14&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law, when a man dieth in a tent: all that come into the tent, and all that <span class='add'>is</span> in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_15">15&#160;</span> And every open vessel, which hath no covering bound upon it, <span class='add'>is</span> unclean.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_16">16&#160;</span> And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_17">17&#160;</span> And for an unclean <span class='add'>person</span> they shall take of the <a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for sin, and <a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>running water shall be put thereto in a vessel:
<span class="verse" id="NU19_18">18&#160;</span> And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip <span class='add'>it</span> in the water, and sprinkle <span class='add'>it</span> upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave:
<span class="verse" id="NU19_19">19&#160;</span> And the clean <span class='add'>person</span> shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at even.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_20">20&#160;</span> But the man that shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: the water of separation hath not been sprinkled upon him; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_21">21&#160;</span> And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until even.
<span class="verse" id="NU19_22">22&#160;</span> And whatsoever the unclean <span class='add'>person</span> toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth <span class='add'>it</span> shall be unclean until even.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU20_1">1&#160;</span> Then came the children of Israel, <span class='add'>even</span> the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_2">2&#160;</span> And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_3">3&#160;</span> And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God that we had died <a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when our brethren died before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>!
<span class="verse" id="NU20_4">4&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>why have ye brought up the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> into this wilderness, that we and our cattle should die there?
<span class="verse" id="NU20_5">5&#160;</span> And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it <span class='add'>is</span> no place of seed, or of figs, or <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>of vines, or of pomegranates; neither <span class='add'>is</span> there any water to drink.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they fell upon their faces: and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU20_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU20_8">8&#160;</span> Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shall give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_9">9&#160;</span> And Moses took the rod from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as he commanded him.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_10">10&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock?
<span class="verse" id="NU20_11">11&#160;</span> And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts <span class='add'>also</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU20_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>This <span class='add'>is</span> the water of <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Meribah; because the children of Israel strove with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he was sanctified in them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU20_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest all the travail that hath <a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>befallen us:
<span class="verse" id="NU20_15">15&#160;</span> How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our fathers:
<span class="verse" id="NU20_16">16&#160;</span> And when we cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border:
<span class="verse" id="NU20_17">17&#160;</span> Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country: we will not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will we drink <span class='add'>of</span> the water of the wells: we will go by the king’s <span class='add'>high</span> way, we will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_18">18&#160;</span> And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_19">19&#160;</span> And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high way: and if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it: I will only, without <span class='add'>doing</span> any thing <span class='add'>else</span>, go through on my feet.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_20">20&#160;</span> And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_21">21&#160;</span> Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border: wherefore Israel turned away from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU20_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel, <span class='add'>even</span> the whole congregation, journeyed from <a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_23">23&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast of the land of Edom, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU20_24">24&#160;</span> Aaron shall be gathered unto his people: for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>word at the water of Meribah.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor:
<span class="verse" id="NU20_26">26&#160;</span> And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son: and Aaron shall be gathered <span class='add'>unto his people</span>, and shall die there.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_27">27&#160;</span> And Moses did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded: and they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_28">28&#160;</span> And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
<span class="verse" id="NU20_29">29&#160;</span> And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days, <span class='add'>even</span> all the house of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_1">1&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> <a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard tell that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against Israel, and took <span class='add'>some</span> of them prisoners.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_2">2&#160;</span> And Israel vowed a vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, If thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of the place <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Hormah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discouraged because of the way.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_5">5&#160;</span> And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? for <span class='add'>there is</span> no bread, neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> water; and <a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>our soul loatheth this light bread.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_6">6&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, for we have spoken against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and against thee; pray unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_9">9&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel set forward, and <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pitched in Oboth.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_11">11&#160;</span> And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at <a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ije-abarim, in the wilderness which <span class='add'>is</span> before Moab, toward the sunrising.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_12">12&#160;</span>¶ From thence they removed, and pitched in the valley of Zared.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_13">13&#160;</span> From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the wilderness that cometh out of the coasts of the Amorites: for Arnon <span class='add'>is</span> the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_14">14&#160;</span> Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>What he did in the Red sea, and in the brooks of Arnon,
<span class="verse" id="NU21_15">15&#160;</span> And at the stream of the brooks that goeth down to the dwelling of Ar, and <a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lieth upon the border of Moab.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_16">16&#160;</span>And from thence <span class='add'>they went</span> to Beer: that <span class='add'>is</span> the well whereof the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give them water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then Israel sang this song, <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Spring up, O well; <a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sing ye unto it:
<span class="verse" id="NU21_18">18&#160;</span> The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by <span class='add'>the direction of</span> the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderness <span class='add'>they went</span> to Mattanah:
<span class="verse" id="NU21_19">19&#160;</span> And from Mattanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth:
<span class="verse" id="NU21_20">20&#160;</span> And from Bamoth <span class='add'>in</span> the valley, that <span class='add'>is</span> in the <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>country of Moab, to the top of <a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Pisgah, which looketh toward <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Jeshimon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU21_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Let me pass through thy land: we will not turn into the fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink <span class='add'>of</span> the waters of the well: <span class='add'>but</span> we will go along by the king’s <span class='add'>high</span> way, until we be past thy borders.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And Sihon would not suffer Israel to pass through his border: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderness: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_24">24&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from Arnon unto Jabbok, even unto the children of Ammon: for the border of the children of Ammon <span class='add'>was</span> strong.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_25">25&#160;</span> And Israel took all these cities: and Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>villages thereof.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_26">26&#160;</span> For Heshbon <span class='add'>was</span> the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken all his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_27">27&#160;</span> Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be built and prepared:
<span class="verse" id="NU21_28">28&#160;</span> For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed Ar of Moab, <span class='add'>and</span> the lords of the high places of Arnon.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_29">29&#160;</span> Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone, O people of <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Chemosh: he hath given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto Sihon king of the Amorites.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_30">30&#160;</span> We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which <span class='add'>reacheth</span> unto Medeba. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_32">32&#160;</span> And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and they took the villages thereof, and drove out the Amorites that <span class='add'>were</span> there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU21_33">33&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he, and all his people, to the battle at Edrei.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_34">34&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land; and <a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon.
<span class="verse" id="NU21_35">35&#160;</span> So they smote him, and his sons, and all his people, until there was none left him alive: and they possessed his land.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU22_1">1&#160;</span> And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab on this side Jordan <span class='add'>by</span> Jericho. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU22_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_3">3&#160;</span> And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they <span class='add'>were</span> many: and Moab was distressed because of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_4">4&#160;</span> And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shall this company lick up all <span class='add'>that are</span> round about us, as the ox licketh up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor <span class='add'>was</span> king of the Moabites at that time.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the river of the land of the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt: behold, they cover the <a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>face of the earth, and they abide over against me:
<span class="verse" id="NU22_6">6&#160;</span> Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people; for they <span class='add'>are</span> too mighty for me: peradventure I shall prevail, <span class='add'>that</span> we may smite them, and <span class='add'>that</span> I may drive them out of the land: for I wot that he whom thou blessest <span class='add'>is</span> blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_7">7&#160;</span> And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balaam, and spake unto him the words of Balak.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_8">8&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall speak unto me: and the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_9">9&#160;</span> And God came unto Balaam, and said, What men <span class='add'>are</span> these with thee?
<span class="verse" id="NU22_10">10&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me, <span class='add'>saying</span>,
<span class="verse" id="NU22_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>there is</span> a people come out of Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them; peradventure <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I shall be able to overcome them, and drive them out.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_12">12&#160;</span> And God said unto Balaam, Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people: for they <span class='add'>are</span> blessed.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_13">13&#160;</span> And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of Balak, Get you into your land: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> refuseth to give me leave to go with you.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_14">14&#160;</span> And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said, Balaam refuseth to come with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU22_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than they.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_16">16&#160;</span> And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the son of Zippor, <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming unto me:
<span class="verse" id="NU22_17">17&#160;</span> For I will promote thee unto very great honour, and I will do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_18">18&#160;</span> And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balak, <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, to do less or more.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_19">19&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will say unto me more.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_20">20&#160;</span> And God came unto Balaam at night, and said unto him, If the men come to call thee, rise up, <span class='add'>and</span> go with them; but yet the word which I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou do.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_21">21&#160;</span> And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU22_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And God’s anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two servants <span class='add'>were</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_23">23&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the ass saw the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field: and Balaam smote the ass, to turn her into the way.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_24">24&#160;</span> But the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood in a path of the vineyards, a wall <span class='add'>being</span> on this side, and a wall on that side.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_25">25&#160;</span> And when the ass saw the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, she thrust herself unto the wall, and crushed Balaam’s foot against the wall: and he smote her again.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_26">26&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went further, and stood in a narrow place, where <span class='add'>was</span> no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_27">27&#160;</span> And when the ass saw the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, she fell down under Balaam: and Balaam’s anger was kindled, and he smote the ass with a staff.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_28">28&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> opened the mouth of the ass, and she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?
<span class="verse" id="NU22_29">29&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I kill thee.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_30">30&#160;</span> And the ass said unto Balaam, <span class='add'>Am</span> not I thine ass, <a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>upon which thou hast ridden <a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ever since <span class='add'>I was</span> thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? And he said, Nay.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_31">31&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed down his head, and <a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fell flat on his face.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_32">32&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? behold, I went out <a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to withstand thee, because <span class='add'>thy</span> way is perverse before me:
<span class="verse" id="NU22_33">33&#160;</span> And the ass saw me, and turned from me these three times: unless she had turned from me, surely now also I had slain thee, and saved her alive.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_34">34&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me: now therefore, if it <a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>displease thee, I will get me back again.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_35">35&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Balaam, Go with the men: but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak. So Balaam went with the princes of Balak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU22_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And when Balak heard that Balaam was come, he went out to meet him unto a city of Moab, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the border of Arnon, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the utmost coast.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_37">37&#160;</span> And Balak said unto Balaam, Did I not earnestly send unto thee to call thee? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indeed to promote thee to honour?
<span class="verse" id="NU22_38">38&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any power at all to say any thing? the word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_39">39&#160;</span> And Balaam went with Balak, and they came unto <a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Kirjath-huzoth.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_40">40&#160;</span> And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the princes that <span class='add'>were</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="NU22_41">41&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might see the utmost <span class='add'>part</span> of the people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU23_1">1&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_2">2&#160;</span> And Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak and Balaam offered on <span class='add'>every</span> altar a bullock and a ram.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_3">3&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go: peradventure the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will come to meet me: and whatsoever he sheweth me I will tell thee. And <a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>he went to an high place.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_4">4&#160;</span> And God met Balaam: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, and I have offered upon <span class='add'>every</span> altar a bullock and a ram.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> put a word in Balaam’s mouth, and said, Return unto Balak, and thus thou shalt speak.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_6">6&#160;</span> And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stood by his burnt sacrifice, he, and all the princes of Moab.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_7">7&#160;</span> And he took up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Come, curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_8">8&#160;</span> How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy, <span class='add'>whom</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not defied?
<span class="verse" id="NU23_9">9&#160;</span> For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him: lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_10">10&#160;</span> Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of Israel? Let <a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!
<span class="verse" id="NU23_11">11&#160;</span> And Balak said unto Balaam, What hast thou done unto me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast blessed <span class='add'>them</span> altogether.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_12">12&#160;</span> And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath put in my mouth? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU23_13">13&#160;</span> And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest see them: thou shalt see but the utmost part of them, and shalt not see them all: and curse me them from thence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU23_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of <a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on <span class='add'>every</span> altar.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_15">15&#160;</span> And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I meet <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> yonder.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_16">16&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> met Balaam, and <a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>put a word in his mouth, and said, Go again unto Balak, and say thus.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_17">17&#160;</span> And when he came to him, behold, he stood by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spoken?
<span class="verse" id="NU23_18">18&#160;</span> And he took up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Zippor:
<span class="verse" id="NU23_19">19&#160;</span> God <span class='add'>is</span> not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do <span class='add'>it</span>? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?
<span class="verse" id="NU23_20">20&#160;</span> Behold, I have received <span class='add'>commandment</span> to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_21">21&#160;</span> He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God <span class='add'>is</span> with him, and the shout of a king <span class='add'>is</span> among them.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_23">23&#160;</span>Surely <span class='add'>there is</span> no enchantment <a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>against Jacob, neither <span class='add'>is there</span> any divination against Israel: according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!
<span class="verse" id="NU23_24">24&#160;</span> Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young lion: he shall not lie down until he eat <span class='add'>of</span> the prey, and drink the blood of the slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU23_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Balak said unto Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_26">26&#160;</span> But Balaam answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thee, saying, All that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> speaketh, that I must do? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU23_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Balak said unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee, I will bring thee unto another place; peradventure it will please God that thou mayest curse me them from thence.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_28">28&#160;</span> And Balak brought Balaam unto the top of Peor, that looketh toward Jeshimon.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_29">29&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
<span class="verse" id="NU23_30">30&#160;</span> And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram on <span class='add'>every</span> altar.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU24_1">1&#160;</span> And when Balaam saw that it pleased the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to bless Israel, he went not, as at <a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>other times, <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_2">2&#160;</span> And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding <span class='add'>in his tents</span> according to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>whose eyes are open hath said:
<span class="verse" id="NU24_4">4&#160;</span> He hath said, which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling <span class='add'>into a trance</span>, but having his eyes open:
<span class="verse" id="NU24_5">5&#160;</span> How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, <span class='add'>and</span> thy tabernacles, O Israel!
<span class="verse" id="NU24_6">6&#160;</span> As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the <a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>river’s side, as the trees of lign aloes which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath planted, <span class='add'>and</span> as cedar trees beside the waters.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_7">7&#160;</span> He shall pour the water out of his buckets, and his seed <span class='add'>shall be</span> in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn: he shall eat up the nations his enemies, and shall break their bones, and pierce <span class='add'>them</span> through with his arrows.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shall stir him up? Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> he that blesseth thee, and cursed <span class='add'>is</span> he that curseth thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU24_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Balak’s anger was kindled against Balaam, and he smote his hands together: and Balak said unto Balaam, I called thee to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether blessed <span class='add'>them</span> these three times.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore now flee thou to thy place: I thought to promote thee unto great honour; but, lo, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath kept thee back from honour.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_12">12&#160;</span> And Balaam said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy messengers which thou sentest unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU24_13">13&#160;</span> If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to do <span class='add'>either</span> good or bad of mine own mind; <span class='add'>but</span> what the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith, that will I speak?
<span class="verse" id="NU24_14">14&#160;</span> And now, behold, I go unto my people: come <span class='add'>therefore, and</span> I will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the latter days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU24_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said:
<span class="verse" id="NU24_16">16&#160;</span> He hath said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, <span class='add'>which</span> saw the vision of the Almighty, falling <span class='add'>into a trance</span>, but having his eyes open:
<span class="verse" id="NU24_17">17&#160;</span> I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and shall <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_18">18&#160;</span> And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies; and Israel shall do valiantly.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_19">19&#160;</span> Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU24_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>And when he looked on Amalek, he took up his parable, and said, Amalek <span class='add'>was</span> the first of the nations; but his latter end <span class='add'>shall be</span> that he perish for ever.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dwellingplace, and thou puttest thy nest in a rock.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_22">22&#160;</span> Nevertheless <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the Kenite shall be wasted, <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_23">23&#160;</span> And he took up his parable, and said, Alas, who shall live when God doeth this!
<span class="verse" id="NU24_24">24&#160;</span> And ships <span class='add'>shall come</span> from the coast of Chittim, and shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall perish for ever.
<span class="verse" id="NU24_25">25&#160;</span> And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place: and Balak also went his way.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU25_1">1&#160;</span> And Israel abode in <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shittim, and the people began to commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_2">2&#160;</span> And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_3">3&#160;</span> And Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor: and the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against the sun, that the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> may be turned away from Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_5">5&#160;</span> And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that were joined unto Baal-peor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU25_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of Israel, who <span class='add'>were</span> weeping <span class='add'>before</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_7">7&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw <span class='add'>it</span>, he rose up from among the congregation, and took a javelin in his hand;
<span class="verse" id="NU25_8">8&#160;</span> And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her belly. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_9">9&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU25_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU25_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_12">12&#160;</span> Wherefore say, <a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace:
<span class="verse" id="NU25_13">13&#160;</span> And he shall have it, and his seed after him, <span class='add'>even</span> the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_14">14&#160;</span> Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, <span class='add'>even</span> that was slain with the Midianitish woman, <span class='add'>was</span> Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>chief house among the Simeonites.
<span class="verse" id="NU25_15">15&#160;</span> And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain <span class='add'>was</span> Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he <span class='add'>was</span> head over a people, <span class='add'>and</span> of a chief house in Midian. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU25_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU25_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Vex the Midianites, and smite them:
<span class="verse" id="NU25_18">18&#160;</span> For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was slain in the day of the plague for Peor’s sake.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass after the plague, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU26_2">2&#160;</span> Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel, <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from twenty years old and upward, throughout their fathers’ house, all that are able to go to war in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_3">3&#160;</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of Moab by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU26_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Take the sum of the people</span>, from twenty years old and upward; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>commanded Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, <span class='add'>of whom cometh</span> the family of the Hanochites: of Pallu, the family of the Palluites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_6">6&#160;</span> Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_7">7&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Reubenites: and they that were numbered of them were forty and three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_8">8&#160;</span> And the sons of Pallu; Eliab.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_9">9&#160;</span> And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This <span class='add'>is that</span> Dathan and Abiram, <span class='add'>which were</span> famous in the congregation, who <a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they strove against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_10">10&#160;</span> And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died, what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became a sign.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_11">11&#160;</span> Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_12">12&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_13">13&#160;</span> Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_14">14&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_15">15&#160;</span>¶ The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haggi, the family of the Haggites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_16">16&#160;</span> Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_17">17&#160;</span> Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_18">18&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the children of Gad according to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_19">19&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The sons of Judah <span class='add'>were</span> Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_20">20&#160;</span> And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_21">21&#160;</span> And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_22">22&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Judah according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_23">23&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Of</span> the sons of Issachar after their families: <span class='add'>of</span> Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_24">24&#160;</span> Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_25">25&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Issachar according to those that were numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_26">26&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Of</span> the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_27">27&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_28">28&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Joseph after their families <span class='add'>were</span> Manasseh and Ephraim.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_29">29&#160;</span> Of the sons of Manasseh: of <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead <span class='add'>come</span> the family of the Gileadites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_30">30&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Gilead: <span class='add'>of</span> Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_31">31&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>of</span> Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and <span class='add'>of</span> Shechem, the family of the Shechemites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_32">32&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>of</span> Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and <span class='add'>of</span> Hepher, the family of the Hepherites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad <span class='add'>were</span> Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_34">34&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_35">35&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_36">36&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_37">37&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred. These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Joseph after their families. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_38">38&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_39">39&#160;</span> Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_40">40&#160;</span> And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman: <span class='add'>of Ard</span>, the family of the Ardites: <span class='add'>and</span> of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_41">41&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they that were numbered of them <span class='add'>were</span> forty and five thousand and six hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_42">42&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Dan after their families.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_43">43&#160;</span> All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were numbered of them, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and four thousand and four hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_44">44&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Of</span> the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_45">45&#160;</span> Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_46">46&#160;</span> And the name of the daughter of Asher <span class='add'>was</span> Sarah.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_47">47&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the sons of Asher according to those that were numbered of them; <span class='add'>who were</span> fifty and three thousand and four hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_48">48&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Of</span> the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites:
<span class="verse" id="NU26_49">49&#160;</span> Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_50">50&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of Naphtali according to their families: and they that were numbered of them <span class='add'>were</span> forty and five thousand and four hundred.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_51">51&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_52">52&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU26_53">53&#160;</span> Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_54">54&#160;</span><a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> To many thou shalt <a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt <a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>give the less inheritance: to every one shall his inheritance be given according to those that were numbered of him.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_55">55&#160;</span> Notwithstanding the land shall be <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>divided by lot: according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_56">56&#160;</span> According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between many and few. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_57">57&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>And these <span class='add'>are</span> they that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_58">58&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_59">59&#160;</span> And the name of Amram’s wife <span class='add'>was</span> <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom <span class='add'>her mother</span> bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_60">60&#160;</span> And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_61">61&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered strange fire before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_62">62&#160;</span> And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand, all males from a month old and upward: for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU26_63">63&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_64">64&#160;</span> But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="NU26_65">65&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said of them, They <a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU27_1">1&#160;</span> Then came the daughters of <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph: and these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of his daughters; Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_2">2&#160;</span> And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all the congregation, <span class='add'>by</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU27_3">3&#160;</span> Our father <a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>died in the wilderness, and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the company of Korah; but died in his own sin, and had no sons.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_4">4&#160;</span> Why should the name of our father be <a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>done away from among his family, because he hath no son? Give unto us <span class='add'>therefore</span> a possession among the brethren of our father.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_5">5&#160;</span> And Moses brought their cause before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU27_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU27_7">7&#160;</span> The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father’s brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to pass unto them.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_9">9&#160;</span> And if he have no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_10">10&#160;</span> And if he have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his father’s brethren.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_11">11&#160;</span> And if his father have no brethren, then ye shall give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU27_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Get thee up into this mount Abarim, and see the land which I have given unto the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_13">13&#160;</span> And when thou hast seen it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aaron thy brother was gathered.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_14">14&#160;</span> For ye <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rebelled against my commandment in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before their eyes: that <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU27_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU27_16">16&#160;</span> Let the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
<span class="verse" id="NU27_17">17&#160;</span> Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be not as sheep which have no shepherd. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU27_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom <span class='add'>is</span> the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him;
<span class="verse" id="NU27_19">19&#160;</span> And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_20">20&#160;</span> And thou shalt put <span class='add'>some</span> of thine honour upon him, that all the congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_21">21&#160;</span> And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask <span class='add'>counsel</span> for him <a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>after the judgment of Urim before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, <span class='add'>both</span> he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="NU27_22">22&#160;</span> And Moses did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him: and he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU27_23">23&#160;</span> And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded by the hand of Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU28_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU28_2">2&#160;</span> Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, <span class='add'>and</span> my bread for my sacrifices made by fire, <span class='add'>for</span> <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in their due season.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt say unto them, <a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>This <span class='add'>is</span> the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; two lambs of the first year without spot <a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>day by day, <span class='add'>for</span> a continual burnt offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_4">4&#160;</span> The one lamb shalt thou offer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at even;
<span class="verse" id="NU28_5">5&#160;</span> And a tenth <span class='add'>part</span> of an ephah of flour for a <a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>meat offering, mingled with the fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of an <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hin of beaten oil.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> a continual burnt offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_7">7&#160;</span> And the drink offering thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> the fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin for the one lamb: in the holy <span class='add'>place</span> shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>for</span> a drink offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_8">8&#160;</span> And the other lamb shalt thou offer at even: as the meat offering of the morning, and as the drink offering thereof, thou shalt offer <span class='add'>it</span>, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU28_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And on the sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot, and two tenth deals of flour <span class='add'>for</span> a meat offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof:
<span class="verse" id="NU28_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>This is</span> the burnt offering of every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU28_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot;
<span class="verse" id="NU28_12">12&#160;</span> And three tenth deals of flour <span class='add'>for</span> a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth deals of flour <span class='add'>for</span> a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;
<span class="verse" id="NU28_13">13&#160;</span> And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil <span class='add'>for</span> a meat offering unto one lamb; <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering of a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_14">14&#160;</span> And their drink offerings shall be half an hin of wine unto a bullock, and the third <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin unto a lamb: this <span class='add'>is</span> the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_15">15&#160;</span> And one kid of the goats for a sin offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be offered, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU28_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And in the fourteenth day of the first month <span class='add'>is</span> the passover of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_17">17&#160;</span> And in the fifteenth day of this month <span class='add'>is</span> the feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_18">18&#160;</span> In the <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>first day <span class='add'>shall be</span> an holy convocation; ye shall do no manner of servile work <span class='add'>therein:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU28_19">19&#160;</span> But ye shall offer a sacrifice made by fire <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; two young bullocks, and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shall be unto you without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU28_20">20&#160;</span> And their meat offering <span class='add'>shall be of</span> flour mingled with oil: three tenth deals shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenth deals for a ram;
<span class="verse" id="NU28_21">21&#160;</span> A several tenth deal shalt thou offer for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
<span class="verse" id="NU28_22">22&#160;</span> And one goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering, to make an atonement for you.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_23">23&#160;</span> Ye shall offer these beside the burnt offering in the morning, which <span class='add'>is</span> for a continual burnt offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_24">24&#160;</span> After this manner ye shall offer daily, throughout the seven days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it shall be offered beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_25">25&#160;</span> And on the seventh day ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU28_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, after your weeks <span class='add'>be out</span>, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work:
<span class="verse" id="NU28_27">27&#160;</span> But ye shall offer the burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year;
<span class="verse" id="NU28_28">28&#160;</span> And their meat offering of flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto one bullock, two tenth deals unto one ram,
<span class="verse" id="NU28_29">29&#160;</span> A several tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout the seven lambs;
<span class="verse" id="NU28_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> one kid of the goats, to make an atonement for you.
<span class="verse" id="NU28_31">31&#160;</span> Ye shall offer <span class='add'>them</span> beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, (they shall be unto you without blemish) and their drink offerings.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_1">1&#160;</span> And in the seventh month, on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work: <a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you.
<span class="verse" id="NU29_2">2&#160;</span> And ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; one young bullock, one ram, <span class='add'>and</span> seven lambs of the first year without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_3">3&#160;</span> And their meat offering <span class='add'>shall be of</span> flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, <span class='add'>and</span> two tenth deals for a ram,
<span class="verse" id="NU29_4">4&#160;</span> And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_5">5&#160;</span> And one kid of the goats <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering, to make an atonement for you:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_6">6&#160;</span> Beside the burnt offering of the month, and his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall have on the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of this seventh month an holy convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls: ye shall not do any work <span class='add'>therein:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_8">8&#160;</span> But ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>for</span> a sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram, <span class='add'>and</span> seven lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_9">9&#160;</span> And their meat offering <span class='add'>shall be of</span> flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a bullock, <span class='add'>and</span> two tenth deals to one ram,
<span class="verse" id="NU29_10">10&#160;</span> A several tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_11">11&#160;</span> One kid of the goats <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink offerings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> seven days:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_13">13&#160;</span> And ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; thirteen young bullocks, two rams, <span class='add'>and</span> fourteen lambs of the first year; they shall be without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_14">14&#160;</span> And their meat offering <span class='add'>shall be of</span> flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the two rams,
<span class="verse" id="NU29_15">15&#160;</span> And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourteen lambs:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_16">16&#160;</span> And one kid of the goats <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And on the second day <span class='add'>ye shall offer</span> twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_18">18&#160;</span> And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_19">19&#160;</span> And one kid of the goats <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering thereof, and their drink offerings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And on the third day eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish;
<span class="verse" id="NU29_21">21&#160;</span> And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_22">22&#160;</span> And one goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And on the fourth day ten bullocks, two rams, <span class='add'>and</span> fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_24">24&#160;</span> Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_25">25&#160;</span> And one kid of the goats <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And on the fifth day nine bullocks, two rams, <span class='add'>and</span> fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_27">27&#160;</span> And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_28">28&#160;</span> And one goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And on the sixth day eight bullocks, two rams, <span class='add'>and</span> fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_30">30&#160;</span> And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_31">31&#160;</span> And one goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And on the seventh day seven bullocks, two rams, <span class='add'>and</span> fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_33">33&#160;</span> And their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_34">34&#160;</span> And one goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and his drink offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_35">35&#160;</span>¶ On the eighth day ye shall have a <a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>solemn assembly: ye shall do no servile work <span class='add'>therein:</span>
<span class="verse" id="NU29_36">36&#160;</span> But ye shall offer a burnt offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: one bullock, one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_37">37&#160;</span> Their meat offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, <span class='add'>shall be</span> according to their number, after the manner:
<span class="verse" id="NU29_38">38&#160;</span> And one goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering, and his drink offering.
<span class="verse" id="NU29_39">39&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>things</span> ye shall <a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>do unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in your set feasts, beside your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, and for your meat offerings, and for your drink offerings, and for your peace offerings.
<span class="verse" id="NU29_40">40&#160;</span> And Moses told the children of Israel according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU30_1">1&#160;</span> And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_2">2&#160;</span> If a man vow a vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not <a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU30_3">3&#160;</span> If a woman also vow a vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and bind herself by a bond, <span class='add'>being</span> in her father’s house in her youth;
<span class="verse" id="NU30_4">4&#160;</span> And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_5">5&#160;</span> But if her father disallow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_6">6&#160;</span> And if she had at all an husband, when <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>she vowed, or uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul;
<span class="verse" id="NU30_7">7&#160;</span> And her husband heard <span class='add'>it</span>, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard <span class='add'>it:</span> then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_8">8&#160;</span> But if her husband <a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>disallowed her on the day that he heard <span class='add'>it;</span> then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall forgive her.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_9">9&#160;</span> But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand against her.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_10">10&#160;</span> And if she vowed in her husband’s house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath;
<span class="verse" id="NU30_11">11&#160;</span> And her husband heard <span class='add'>it</span>, and held his peace at her, <span class='add'>and</span> disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_12">12&#160;</span> But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard <span class='add'>them; then</span> whatsoever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall forgive her.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_13">13&#160;</span> Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_14">14&#160;</span> But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which <span class='add'>are</span> upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the day that he heard <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_15">15&#160;</span> But if he shall any ways make them void after that he hath heard <span class='add'>them;</span> then he shall bear her iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="NU30_16">16&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the statutes, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, <span class='add'>being yet</span> in her youth in her father’s house.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU31_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou <a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be gathered unto thy people.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_3">3&#160;</span> And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of Midian.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Of every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_5">5&#160;</span> So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of <span class='add'>every</span> tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of <span class='add'>every</span> tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU31_7">7&#160;</span> And they warred against the Midianites, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses; and they slew all the males.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_8">8&#160;</span> And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; <span class='add'>namely</span>, <a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_9">9&#160;</span> And the children of Israel took <span class='add'>all</span> the women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_10">10&#160;</span> And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all their goodly castles, with fire.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_11">11&#160;</span> And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, <span class='add'>both</span> of men and of beasts.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_12">12&#160;</span> And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which <span class='add'>are</span> by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU31_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them without the camp.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_14">14&#160;</span> And Moses was wroth with the officers of the host, <span class='add'>with</span> the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the <a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>battle.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_15">15&#160;</span> And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
<span class="verse" id="NU31_16">16&#160;</span> Behold, <a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these caused the children of Israel, through the <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the matter of Peor, and there was a plague among the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_17">17&#160;</span> Now therefore <a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with <a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>him.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_18">18&#160;</span> But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_19">19&#160;</span> And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath killed any person, and <a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whosoever hath touched any slain, purify <span class='add'>both</span> yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_20">20&#160;</span> And purify all <span class='add'>your</span> raiment, and all <a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that is made of skins, and all work of goats’ <span class='add'>hair</span>, and all things made of wood.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU31_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the battle, This <span class='add'>is</span> the ordinance of the law which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses;
<span class="verse" id="NU31_22">22&#160;</span> Only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_23">23&#160;</span> Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shall make <span class='add'>it</span> go through the fire, and it shall be clean: nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of separation: and all that abideth not the fire ye shall make go through the water.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_24">24&#160;</span> And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU31_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_26">26&#160;</span> Take the sum of the prey <a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that was taken, <span class='add'>both</span> of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU31_27">27&#160;</span> And divide the prey into two parts; between them that took the war upon them, who went out to battle, and between all the congregation:
<span class="verse" id="NU31_28">28&#160;</span> And levy a tribute unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of the men of war which went out to battle: one soul of five hundred, <span class='add'>both</span> of the persons, and of the beeves, and of the asses, and of the sheep:
<span class="verse" id="NU31_29">29&#160;</span> Take <span class='add'>it</span> of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the priest, <span class='add'>for</span> an heave offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_30">30&#160;</span> And of the children of Israel’s half, thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of the beeves, of the asses, and of the <a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>flocks, of all manner of beasts, and give them unto the Levites, which keep the charge of the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_31">31&#160;</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_32">32&#160;</span> And the booty, <span class='add'>being</span> the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand sheep,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_33">33&#160;</span> And threescore and twelve thousand beeves,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_34">34&#160;</span> And threescore and one thousand asses,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_35">35&#160;</span> And thirty and two thousand persons in all, of women that had not known man by lying with him.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_36">36&#160;</span> And the half, <span class='add'>which was</span> the portion of them that went out to war, was in number three hundred thousand and seven and thirty thousand and five hundred sheep:
<span class="verse" id="NU31_37">37&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> tribute of the sheep was six hundred and threescore and fifteen.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_38">38&#160;</span> And the beeves <span class='add'>were</span> thirty and six thousand; of which the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> tribute <span class='add'>was</span> threescore and twelve.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_39">39&#160;</span> And the asses <span class='add'>were</span> thirty thousand and five hundred; of which the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> tribute <span class='add'>was</span> threescore and one.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_40">40&#160;</span> And the persons <span class='add'>were</span> sixteen thousand; of which the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> tribute <span class='add'>was</span> thirty and two persons.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_41">41&#160;</span> And Moses gave the tribute, <span class='add'>which was</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> heave offering, unto Eleazar the priest, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_42">42&#160;</span> And of the children of Israel’s half, which Moses divided from the men that warred,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_43">43&#160;</span>(Now the half <span class='add'>that pertained unto</span> the congregation was three hundred thousand and thirty thousand <span class='add'>and</span> seven thousand and five hundred sheep,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_44">44&#160;</span> And thirty and six thousand beeves,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_45">45&#160;</span> And thirty thousand asses and five hundred,
<span class="verse" id="NU31_46">46&#160;</span> And sixteen thousand persons;)
<span class="verse" id="NU31_47">47&#160;</span> Even of the children of Israel’s half, Moses took one portion of fifty, <span class='add'>both</span> of man and of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU31_48">48&#160;</span>¶ And the officers which <span class='add'>were</span> over thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses:
<span class="verse" id="NU31_49">49&#160;</span> And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which <span class='add'>are</span> under our <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>charge, and there lacketh not one man of us.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_50">50&#160;</span> We have therefore brought an oblation for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, what every man hath <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings, earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_51">51&#160;</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, <span class='add'>even</span> all wrought jewels.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_52">52&#160;</span> And all the gold of the <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offering that they offered up to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.
<span class="verse" id="NU31_53">53&#160;</span>(<span class='add'>For</span> the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.)
<span class="verse" id="NU31_54">54&#160;</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation, <span class='add'>for</span> a memorial for the children of Israel before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU32_1">1&#160;</span> Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place <span class='add'>was</span> a place for cattle;
<span class="verse" id="NU32_2">2&#160;</span> The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_3">3&#160;</span> Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> the country which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote before the congregation of Israel, <span class='add'>is</span> a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle:
<span class="verse" id="NU32_5">5&#160;</span> Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy servants for a possession, <span class='add'>and</span> bring us not over Jordan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU32_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here?
<span class="verse" id="NU32_7">7&#160;</span> And wherefore <a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given them?
<span class="verse" id="NU32_8">8&#160;</span> Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_9">9&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had given them.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_10">10&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anger was kindled the same time, and he sware, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_11">11&#160;</span> Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, <a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not <a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wholly followed me:
<span class="verse" id="NU32_12">12&#160;</span> Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of Nun: for they have wholly followed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation, that had done evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, was consumed.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_14">14&#160;</span> And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers’ stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> toward Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_15">15&#160;</span> For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU32_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones:
<span class="verse" id="NU32_17">17&#160;</span> But we ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_18">18&#160;</span> We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_19">19&#160;</span> For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan eastward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU32_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will go armed before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to war,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_21">21&#160;</span> And will go all of you armed over Jordan before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, until he hath driven out his enemies from before him,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_22">22&#160;</span> And the land be subdued before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_23">23&#160;</span> But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and be sure your sin will find you out.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_24">24&#160;</span> Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep; and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_25">25&#160;</span> And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_26">26&#160;</span> Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead:
<span class="verse" id="NU32_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But thy servants will pass over, every man armed for war, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to battle, as my lord saith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU32_28">28&#160;</span> So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="NU32_29">29&#160;</span> And Moses said unto them, If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every man armed to battle, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the land shall be subdued before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession:
<span class="verse" id="NU32_30">30&#160;</span> But if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_31">31&#160;</span> And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying, As the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said unto thy servants, so will we do.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_32">32&#160;</span> We will pass over armed before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> into the land of Canaan, that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan <span class='add'>may be</span> ours.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_33">33&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Moses gave unto them, <span class='add'>even</span> to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts, <span class='add'>even</span> the cities of the country round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU32_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_35">35&#160;</span> And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_36">36&#160;</span> And Beth-nimrah, and Beth-haran, fenced cities: and folds for sheep.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_37">37&#160;</span> And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim,
<span class="verse" id="NU32_38">38&#160;</span> And Nebo, and Baal-meon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah: and <a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>gave other names unto the cities which they builded.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_39">39&#160;</span> And the children of <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which <span class='add'>was</span> in it.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_40">40&#160;</span> And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_41">41&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns thereof, and called them Havoth-jair.
<span class="verse" id="NU32_42">42&#160;</span> And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and called it Nobah, after his own name.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU33_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_2">2&#160;</span> And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and these <span class='add'>are</span> their journeys according to their goings out.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_3">3&#160;</span> And they <a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_4">4&#160;</span> For the Egyptians buried all <span class='add'>their</span> firstborn, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had smitten among them: upon their gods also the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> executed judgments.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_5">5&#160;</span> And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in Succoth.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_6">6&#160;</span> And they departed from <a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the edge of the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_7">7&#160;</span> And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pi-hahiroth, which <span class='add'>is</span> before Baal-zephon: and they pitched before Migdol.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_8">8&#160;</span> And they departed from before Pi-hahiroth, and <a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days’ journey in the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_9">9&#160;</span> And they removed from Marah, and <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>came unto Elim: and in Elim <span class='add'>were</span> twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they pitched there.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_10">10&#160;</span> And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_11">11&#160;</span> And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wilderness of Sin.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_12">12&#160;</span> And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_13">13&#160;</span> And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_14">14&#160;</span> And they removed from Alush, and encamped at <a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_15">15&#160;</span> And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wilderness of Sinai.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_16">16&#160;</span> And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched <a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>at <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Kibroth-hattaavah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_17">17&#160;</span> And they departed from Kibroth-hattaavah, and <a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>encamped at Hazeroth.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_18">18&#160;</span> And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_19">19&#160;</span> And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmon-parez.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_20">20&#160;</span> And they departed from Rimmon-parez, and pitched in Libnah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_21">21&#160;</span> And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_22">22&#160;</span> And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_23">23&#160;</span> And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_24">24&#160;</span> And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_25">25&#160;</span> And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_26">26&#160;</span> And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_27">27&#160;</span> And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_28">28&#160;</span> And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_29">29&#160;</span> And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_30">30&#160;</span> And they departed from Hashmonah, and <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>encamped at Moseroth.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_31">31&#160;</span> And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Bene-jaakan.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_32">32&#160;</span> And they removed from Bene-jaakan, and encamped at Hor-hagidgad.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_33">33&#160;</span> And they went from Hor-hagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_34">34&#160;</span> And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_35">35&#160;</span> And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Ezion-gaber.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_36">36&#160;</span> And they removed from Ezion-gaber, and pitched in the <a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wilderness of Zin, which <span class='add'>is</span> Kadesh.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_37">37&#160;</span> And they removed from <a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_38">38&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the fifth month.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_39">39&#160;</span> And Aaron <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and twenty and three years old when he died in mount Hor.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_40">40&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_41">41&#160;</span> And they departed from mount <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_42">42&#160;</span> And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_43">43&#160;</span> And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_44">44&#160;</span> And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in <a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Ije-abarim, in the border of Moab.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_45">45&#160;</span> And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibon-gad.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_46">46&#160;</span> And they removed from Dibon-gad, and encamped in Almon-diblathaim.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_47">47&#160;</span> And they removed from Almon-diblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_48">48&#160;</span> And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_49">49&#160;</span> And they pitched by Jordan, from Beth-jesimoth <span class='add'>even</span> unto <a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU33_50">50&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU33_51">51&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, <a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
<span class="verse" id="NU33_52">52&#160;</span> Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places:
<span class="verse" id="NU33_53">53&#160;</span> And ye shall dispossess <span class='add'>the inhabitants</span> of the land, and dwell therein: for I have given you the land to possess it.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_54">54&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families: <span class='add'>and</span> to the more ye shall <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>give the more inheritance, and to the fewer ye shall <a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>give the less inheritance: every man’s <span class='add'>inheritance</span> shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_55">55&#160;</span> But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain of them <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.
<span class="verse" id="NU33_56">56&#160;</span>Moreover it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> I shall do unto you, as I thought to do unto them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU34_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU34_2">2&#160;</span> Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan; (this <span class='add'>is</span> the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, <span class='add'>even</span> the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:)
<span class="verse" id="NU34_3">3&#160;</span> Then <a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea eastward:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_4">4&#160;</span> And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be from the south to Kadesh-barnea, and shall go on to Hazar-addar, and pass on to Azmon:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_5">5&#160;</span> And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_6">6&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> the western border, ye shall even have the great sea for a border: this shall be your west border.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_7">7&#160;</span> And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall point out for you mount Hor:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_8">8&#160;</span> From mount Hor ye shall point out <span class='add'>your border</span> unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the border shall be to Zedad: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU34_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the border shall go on to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shall be at Hazar-enan: this shall be your north border.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_10">10&#160;</span> And ye shall point out your east border from Hazar-enan to Shepham:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_11">11&#160;</span> And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach unto the <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_12">12&#160;</span> And the border shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_13">13&#160;</span> And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded to give unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the tribe of the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and the tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their fathers, have received <span class='add'>their inheritance;</span> and half the tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance:
<span class="verse" id="NU34_15">15&#160;</span> The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU34_16">16&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU34_17">17&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the men which shall divide the land unto you: <a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_18">18&#160;</span> And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_19">19&#160;</span> And the names of the men <span class='add'>are</span> these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_20">20&#160;</span> And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_21">21&#160;</span> Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_22">22&#160;</span> And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the son of Jogli.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_23">23&#160;</span> The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_24">24&#160;</span> And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_25">25&#160;</span> And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_26">26&#160;</span> And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_27">27&#160;</span> And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_28">28&#160;</span> And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
<span class="verse" id="NU34_29">29&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are they</span> whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded to divide the inheritance unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU35_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU35_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Command the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in; and ye shall give <span class='add'>also</span> unto the Levites suburbs for the cities round about them.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_3">3&#160;</span> And the cities shall they have to dwell in; and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle, and for their goods, and for all their beasts.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_4">4&#160;</span> And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give unto the Levites, <span class='add'>shall reach</span> from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_5">5&#160;</span> And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits; and the city <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the midst: this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_6">6&#160;</span> And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites <span class='add'>there shall be</span> <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and <a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to them ye shall add forty and two cities.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>So</span> all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites <span class='add'>shall be</span> forty and eight cities: them <span class='add'>shall ye give</span> with their suburbs.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_8">8&#160;</span> And the cities which ye shall give <span class='add'>shall be</span> of the possession of the children of Israel: from <span class='add'>them that have</span> many ye shall give many; but from <span class='add'>them that have</span> few ye shall give few: every one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according to his inheritance which <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he inheriteth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU35_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying,
<span class="verse" id="NU35_10">10&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>When ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
<span class="verse" id="NU35_11">11&#160;</span> Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person <a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>at unawares.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_12">12&#160;</span> And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_13">13&#160;</span> And of these cities which ye shall give six cities shall ye have for refuge.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_14">14&#160;</span> Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan, <span class='add'>which</span> shall be cities of refuge.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_15">15&#160;</span> These six cities shall be a refuge, <span class='add'>both</span> for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that every one that killeth any person unawares may flee thither.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he <span class='add'>is</span> a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_17">17&#160;</span> And if he smite him <a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he <span class='add'>is</span> a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_18">18&#160;</span>Or <span class='add'>if</span> he smite him with an hand weapon of wood, wherewith he may die, and he die, he <span class='add'>is</span> a murderer: the murderer shall surely be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_19">19&#160;</span> The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer: when he meeteth him, he shall slay him.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_20">20&#160;</span> But if <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die;
<span class="verse" id="NU35_21">21&#160;</span> Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote <span class='add'>him</span> shall surely be put to death; <span class='add'>for</span> he <span class='add'>is</span> a murderer: the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer, when he meeteth him.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_22">22&#160;</span> But if he thrust him suddenly <a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>without enmity, or have cast upon him any thing without laying of wait,
<span class="verse" id="NU35_23">23&#160;</span> Or with any stone, wherewith a man may die, seeing <span class='add'>him</span> not, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> upon him, that he die, and <span class='add'>was</span> not his enemy, neither sought his harm:
<span class="verse" id="NU35_24">24&#160;</span> Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood according to these judgments:
<span class="verse" id="NU35_25">25&#160;</span> And the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he was fled: and he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_26">26&#160;</span> But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the city of his refuge, whither he was fled;
<span class="verse" id="NU35_27">27&#160;</span> And the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the revenger of blood kill the slayer; <a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he shall not be guilty of blood:
<span class="verse" id="NU35_28">28&#160;</span> Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the slayer shall return into the land of his possession.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_29">29&#160;</span>So these <span class='add'>things</span> shall be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_30">30&#160;</span> Whoso killeth any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the <a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall not testify against any person <span class='add'>to cause him</span> to die.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_31">31&#160;</span> Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>guilty of death: but he shall be surely put to death.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_32">32&#160;</span> And ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_33">33&#160;</span> So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye <span class='add'>are:</span> for blood it defileth the land: and <a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.
<span class="verse" id="NU35_34">34&#160;</span> Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> dwell among the children of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NU36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU36_1">1&#160;</span> And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="NU36_2">2&#160;</span> And they said, <a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel: and my lord was commanded by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_3">3&#160;</span> And if they be married to any of the sons of the <span class='add'>other</span> tribes of the children of Israel, then shall their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the tribe <a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>whereunto they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot of our inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_4">4&#160;</span> And when the jubile of the children of Israel shall be, then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shall their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NU36_5">5&#160;</span> And Moses commanded the children of Israel according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_6">6&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them <a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>marry to whom they think best; <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_7">7&#160;</span> So shall not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shall <a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>keep himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_8">8&#160;</span> And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_9">9&#160;</span> Neither shall the inheritance remove from <span class='add'>one</span> tribe to another tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shall keep himself to his own inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_10">10&#160;</span> Even as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad:
<span class="verse" id="NU36_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their father’s brothers’ sons:
<span class="verse" id="NU36_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> they were married <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.
<span class="verse" id="NU36_13">13&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the commandments and the judgments, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan <span class='add'>near</span> Jericho. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_12'>30. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU1_2"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 poll]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU1_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 poll]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU1_20"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 poll]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU2_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. over against.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_23'>6. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. whose hand he filled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_1'>10. 1</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_61'>26. 61</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_2'>24. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_1'>13. 1</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_26'>27. 26</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU8_16'>8. 16</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 they shall be]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_11'>46. 11</a>. Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_16'>6. 16</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_57'>26. 57</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_1'>6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_35"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.35</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 northwards]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the office of the charge.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU3_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.47</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_13'>30. 13</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_25'>27. 25</a>. ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_16'>18. 16</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK45_12'>45. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_30'>25. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pour out withal.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>25. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_38'>25. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bowls.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_34'>30. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_23'>30. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to war the warfare.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, carriage.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. warfare.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_15'>26. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU4_40"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.40</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 houses]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV13_3'>13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV15_2'>15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV21_1'>21. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV6_3'>6. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV6_5'>6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, heave offering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_12'>10. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, being in the power of thy husband.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. under thy husband.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_20"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 hath ben]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU5_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, make themselves Nazarites.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Nazariteship.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. vine of the wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG13_5'>13 5</a>. 1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_11'>1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. separation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_14"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 lamb]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_24'>21. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_27'>29. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_18'>40. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who stood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_1'>2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_23'>4. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_31"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits of the weight]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_55"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.55</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits of the weight]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_61"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.61</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 a]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU7_89"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.89</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_37'>25. 37</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_25'>40. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>25. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_18'>25. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. let them cause a rasor to pass over, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wave.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wave offering</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they may be to execute, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_45'>3. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_2'>13. 2</a>. ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_13'>3 13</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_23'>2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. given.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to war the warfare of, &amp;c</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU8_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. return from the warfare of the service.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_1'>12. 1</a>, &amp;c. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_5'>23. 5</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_16'>28. 16</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_2'>16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. between the two evenings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_46'>12. 46</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_36'>19. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_49'>12. 49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_34'>40. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. prolonged.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU9_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 40. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_36'>36</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_37'>37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU2_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU4_4'>4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_17'>17.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. These.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 68 <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS68_1'>1</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS68_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU10_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ten thousand thousands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, were as it were complainers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it was evil in the ears of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_21'>78. 21</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sunk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, A burning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_38'>12. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lusted a lust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. returned and wept.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_6'>10. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 16. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_14'>14</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb eye of it as the eye of.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. month of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS50_2'>50. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_1'>59. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_13'>16. 13</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_26'>78. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as it were the way of a day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_31'>78. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The graves of lust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU11_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they were in, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU12_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Cushite.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU12_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. taken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_4'>45. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB3_2'>3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU12_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_11'>33. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU12_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV13_46'>13. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU13_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_24'>1 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU13_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valley.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU13_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, valley.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU13_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, a cluster of grapes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU13_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_3'>33. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU13_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men of statures.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb shadow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_12'>32. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT9_28'>9. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_6'>34. 6</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_8'>103. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_5'>20. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_7'>34. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hitherto</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. If they see the land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_6'>14. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_65'>26. 65</a>. &amp;c <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_10'>32. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_35'>1. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lifted up my hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, feed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS95_10'>95. 10</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK4_6'>4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_34"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, altering of my purpose.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.37</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_10'>10. 10</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB3_17'>3. 17</a>. Jude <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.40</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_41'>1. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU14_45"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.45</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_44'>1. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_10'>23 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV22_21'>22. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. separating.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_18'>29. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_1'>2. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_49'>12. 49</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU9_14'>9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ordinance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_27'>4. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. doeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with an high hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_12'>24 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU15_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_12'>22. 12</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_5'>23. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_3'>27. 3</a>. Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_21'>45 21</a>. Judo <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_0'>11.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_9'>26. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. It is much for you.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bore out</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_4'>4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. as every man dieth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. create a creature.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU16_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.31</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_3'>27. 3</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_6'>11. 6</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_17'>106. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU17_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_22'>25 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU17_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a rod for one prince, a rod for one prince.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU17_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_4'>9. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU17_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb children of rebellion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_45'>3. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_14'>10. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_28'>27. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_2'>13. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_29'>22. 29</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_26'>27. 26</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_13'>3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_13'>30. 13</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_25'>27. 25</a>. ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_47'>3. 47</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK45_12'>45. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_26'>29. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_9'>10. 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_2'>18 2</a>. Josh 13. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_14'>14</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_33'>33</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_28'>44. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to die.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU18_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fat.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU19_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_11'>13 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU19_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_14'>29. 14</a> Lev 4 <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_11'>11</a>, <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU19_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU19_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. dust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU19_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. living waters shall be given.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_33'>11 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_3'>17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits of]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_82'>106. 82</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Strife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found us.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_37'>33. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mouth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_38'>33. 38</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_50'>32 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU20_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_6'>10. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_50'>32. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_40'>33. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.3</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, Utter destruction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grieved.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shortened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_6'>11. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Wisd. 16 <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_1'>1</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_5'>5</a>. 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_9'>10. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Kings <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_4'>18. 4</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_14'>3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_43'>33. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Heaps of Abarim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Vaheb in Suphah</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. leaneth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Ascend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, answer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. field.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The hill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The tenderness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT2_27'>2 27</a>. Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG11_19'>11. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_7'>29. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_2'>12. 2</a> Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_11'>135. 11</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM2_9'>2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb daughters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.29</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kings 11. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_7'>7</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_1'>3. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_7'>29. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU21_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_11'>135. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_9'>24. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. eye.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I shall prevail in fighting against him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Be not thou letted from, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU24_13'>24. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.23</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_16'>2. 16</a>. Jude <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who hast ridden upon me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ever since thou wast, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bowed himself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to be an adversary unto thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb be evil in thine eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU22_39"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, A city of streets.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU23_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he went solitary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU23_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. my soul, or, my life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU23_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The hill.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU23_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU22_35'>22. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU23_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU24_8'>24. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU23_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 23. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_3'>3</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to the meeting of enchantments</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 23 <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_7'>7</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_18'>18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. who had his eyes shut, but now open.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 24.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 river side]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_22'>23 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_9'>49 9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, smile through the princes of Moab.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Israel, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS_17'>Ex. 17</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_0'>8.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall be even to destruction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Kain.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU24_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, how long shall it be ere Asshur carry thee away captive?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_49'>33. 49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_3'>4 3</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS22_17'>22 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_30'>106. 30</a> 1 Mac. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>2. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.9</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_8'>10 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_30'>106 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ecclus. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_24'>45 24</a>. 1 Mac. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>2. 54</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. house of a father.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU25_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU31_2'>31. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_3'>1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_1'>1. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_8'>46 8</a> Ex b <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_0'>14.</a> 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_1'>5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_2'>16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_2'>38 2</a>, &amp;c. &amp;c <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN46_12'>46. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_1'>17. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.33</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_1'>27. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.54</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_54'>33. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_54"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiply his inheritance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_54"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. diminish his inheritance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_55"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.55</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_54'>33. 54</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_23'>11. 23</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_2'>14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_57"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. 6. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_16'>16</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_17'>17</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_18'>18</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_59"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.59</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_2'>2. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_20'>6. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_61"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.61</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_2'>10. 2</a>. ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU3_4'>3. 4</a>. 1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_2'>24. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU26_65"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.65</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_28'>14. 28</a>. 1 Cor. 10. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_5'>5</a>, <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_83'>26. 83</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_3'>17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_35'>14. 35</a>. &amp;c 26. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_64'>64</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_65'>65</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. diminished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_49'>32. 49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_24'>20. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_24'>20. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU27_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_30'>23. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a savour of my rest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_38'>29. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in a day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. between the two evenings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_1'>2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_40'>29. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_18'>12. 18</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_5'>23. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU28_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_7'>23. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU29_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_24'>23. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU29_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV16_29'>16. 29</a>. &amp;c <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_27'>23. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU29_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_36'>23. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU29_39"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, offer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU30_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. profane.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU30_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. her vows were upon her.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU30_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 disallow]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_17'>25. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_13'>27. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A thousand of a tribe, a thousand of a tribe.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_21'>13 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. host of war.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_2'>25. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.16</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_15'>2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG21_11'>21. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a male.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU19_11'>19. 11</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. instrument, or, vessel of skins.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb of the captivity.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, goats.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_49"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_50"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU31_52"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.52</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heave offering.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. break.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU13_24'>13. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 14. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_28'>28</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. ful filled after me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_13'>1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_12'>4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_12'>3. 12</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_8'>13. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS22_4'>22. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_38"><span class="notemark">†</span> 32.38</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they called by names the names of the cities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.39</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN50_23'>50. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU32_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.41</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_14'>3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_37'>12. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_20'>13. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_22'>15. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_27'>15. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_1'>16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_1'>17. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_1'>19. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_34'>11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, The graves of lust.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_35'>11. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_6'>10. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.36</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_1'>20. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.37</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_22'>20. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.38</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_25'>20. 25</a> Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_50'>32. 50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.40</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_1'>21. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.41</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_4'>21. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_44"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.44</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Heaps of Abarim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_49"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 33.49</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The plains of Shittim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_49"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.49</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_1'>25. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.51</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_2'>7. 2</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_12'>11. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.54</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_53'>26. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_54"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. multiply his inheritance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_54"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. diminish his inheritance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU33_55"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.55</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS28_13'>28. 13</a>. Judg. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU34_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_1'>15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU34_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 34.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU34_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU32_33'>32. 33</a>. Josh. 14. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_2'>2</a>, <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU34_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_51'>19. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS21_2'>21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_41'>4. 41</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS20_2'>20. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS21_3'>21. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. above them ye shall give.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they inherit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_2'>19. 2</a> Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS20_2'>20. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by error.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_14'>21. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with a stone of the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_11'>19. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_18'>21. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. no blood shall be to him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_6'>17 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_15'>19. 15</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_16'>18. 16</a>. 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C213_1'>13. 1</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_28'>10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. faulty to die.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU35_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 35.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. there can be no expiation for the land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_1'>27. 1</a>. Josh. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_3'>17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. unto whom they shall be.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 36.3</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 whereinto]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. be wives.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Tob. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_9'>1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. cleave to the, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_1'>27. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NU36_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to some that were of the families.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
