<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Philemon 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Philemon</a></li>
</ul>
<div class='main' id='PM0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO PHILEMON  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PM1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="PM1_1">1&#160;</span> Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy <span class='add'>our</span> brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellowlabourer,
<span class="verse" id="PM1_2">2&#160;</span> And to <span class='add'>our</span> beloved Apphia, and Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in thy house:
<span class="verse" id="PM1_3">3&#160;</span> Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PM1_4">4&#160;</span> I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers,
<span class="verse" id="PM1_5">5&#160;</span> Hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all saints;
<span class="verse" id="PM1_6">6&#160;</span> That the communication of thy faith may become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_7">7&#160;</span> For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee, brother.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_8">8&#160;</span> Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient,
<span class="verse" id="PM1_9">9&#160;</span>Yet for love’s sake I rather beseech <span class='add'>thee</span>, being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_10">10&#160;</span> I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds:
<span class="verse" id="PM1_11">11&#160;</span> Which in time past was to thee unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to me:
<span class="verse" id="PM1_12">12&#160;</span> Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is, mine own bowels:
<span class="verse" id="PM1_13">13&#160;</span> Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel:
<span class="verse" id="PM1_14">14&#160;</span> But without thy mind would I do nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_15">15&#160;</span> For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest receive him for ever;
<span class="verse" id="PM1_16">16&#160;</span> Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord?
<span class="verse" id="PM1_17">17&#160;</span> If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_18">18&#160;</span> If he hath wronged thee, or oweth  <span class='add'>thee</span> ought, put that on mine account;
<span class="verse" id="PM1_19">19&#160;</span> I Paul have written <span class='add'>it</span> with mine own hand, I will repay <span class='add'>it</span>: albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_20">20&#160;</span> Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PM1_21">21&#160;</span> Having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_22">22&#160;</span> But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PM1_23">23&#160;</span> There salute thee Epaphras, my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus;
<span class="verse" id="PM1_24">24&#160;</span> Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my fellowlabourers.
<span class="verse" id="PM1_25">25&#160;</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ <span class='add'>be</span> with your spirit. Amen. </div>
<div class='s'>Written from Rome to Philemon, by Onesimus, a servant. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
