<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Philippians 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Philippians</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP4_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='PP0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE PHILIPPIANS  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PP1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="PP1_1">1&#160;</span> Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philippi, with the bishops and deacons:
<span class="verse" id="PP1_2">2&#160;</span> Grace <span class='add'>be</span> unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and <span class='add'>from</span> the Lord Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_3">3&#160;</span> I thank my God upon every <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>remembrance of you,
<span class="verse" id="PP1_4">4&#160;</span> Always in every prayer of mine for you all making request with joy,
<span class="verse" id="PP1_5">5&#160;</span> For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day until now;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_6">6&#160;</span> Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>will perform <span class='add'>it</span> until the day of Jesus Christ:
<span class="verse" id="PP1_7">7&#160;</span> Even as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye all are <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>partakers of my grace.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_8">8&#160;</span> For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_9">9&#160;</span> And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and <span class='add'>in</span> all <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>judgment;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_10">10&#160;</span> That ye may <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>approve things that <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_11">11&#160;</span> Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP1_12">12&#160;</span> But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things <span class='add'>which happened</span> unto me have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_13">13&#160;</span> So that my bonds <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in Christ are manifest in all <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the palace, and <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in all other <span class='add'>places</span>;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_14">14&#160;</span> And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_15">15&#160;</span> Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of good will:
<span class="verse" id="PP1_16">16&#160;</span> The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds:
<span class="verse" id="PP1_17">17&#160;</span> But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_18">18&#160;</span> What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_19">19&#160;</span> For I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
<span class="verse" id="PP1_20">20&#160;</span> According to my earnest expectation and <span class='add'>my</span> hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but <span class='add'>that</span> with all boldness, as always, <span class='add'>so</span> now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether <span class='add'>it be</span> by life, or by death.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_21">21&#160;</span> For to me to live <span class='add'>is</span> Christ, and to die <span class='add'>is</span> gain.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_22">22&#160;</span> But if I live in the flesh, this <span class='add'>is</span> the fruit of my labour: yet what I shall choose I wot not.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_23">23&#160;</span> For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better:
<span class="verse" id="PP1_24">24&#160;</span> Nevertheless to abide in the flesh <span class='add'>is</span> more needful for you.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_25">25&#160;</span> And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_26">26&#160;</span> That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_27">27&#160;</span> Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_28">28&#160;</span> And in nothing terrified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.
<span class="verse" id="PP1_29">29&#160;</span> For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake;
<span class="verse" id="PP1_30">30&#160;</span> Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear <span class='add'>to be</span> in me.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PP2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP2_1">1&#160;</span> If <span class='add'>there be</span> therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
<span class="verse" id="PP2_2">2&#160;</span> Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, <span class='add'>being</span> of one accord, of one mind.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Let</span> nothing <span class='add'>be done</span> through strife or vainglory; but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_4">4&#160;</span> Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_5">5&#160;</span> Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus:
<span class="verse" id="PP2_6">6&#160;</span> Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God:
<span class="verse" id="PP2_7">7&#160;</span> But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>likeness of men:
<span class="verse" id="PP2_8">8&#160;</span> And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_9">9&#160;</span> Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name:
<span class="verse" id="PP2_10">10&#160;</span> That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of <span class='add'>things</span> in heaven, and <span class='add'>things</span> in earth, and <span class='add'>things</span> under the earth;
<span class="verse" id="PP2_11">11&#160;</span> And <span class='add'>that</span> every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ <span class='add'>is</span> Lord, to the glory of God the Father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP2_12">12&#160;</span> Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_13">13&#160;</span> For it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of <span class='add'>his</span> good pleasure.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_14">14&#160;</span> Do all things without murmurings and disputings:
<span class="verse" id="PP2_15">15&#160;</span> That ye may be blameless and <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ye shine as lights in the world;
<span class="verse" id="PP2_16">16&#160;</span> Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_17">17&#160;</span> Yea, and if I be <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_18">18&#160;</span> For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP2_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_20">20&#160;</span> For I have no man <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>likeminded, who will naturally care for your state.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_21">21&#160;</span> For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_22">22&#160;</span> But ye know the proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_23">23&#160;</span> Him therefore I hope to send presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with me.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_24">24&#160;</span> But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come shortly.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_25">25&#160;</span> Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labour, and fellowsoldier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my wants.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_26">26&#160;</span> For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness, because that ye had heard that he had been sick.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_27">27&#160;</span> For indeed he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_28">28&#160;</span> I sent him therefore the more carefully, that, when ye see him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.
<span class="verse" id="PP2_29">29&#160;</span> Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness; and <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hold such in reputation:
<span class="verse" id="PP2_30">30&#160;</span> Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PP3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP3_1">1&#160;</span> Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed <span class='add'>is</span> not grievous, but for you <span class='add'>it is</span> safe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP3_2">2&#160;</span> Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_3">3&#160;</span> For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_4">4&#160;</span> Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more:
<span class="verse" id="PP3_5">5&#160;</span> Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, <span class='add'>of</span> the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee;
<span class="verse" id="PP3_6">6&#160;</span> Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_7">7&#160;</span> But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_8">8&#160;</span> Yea doubtless, and I count all things <span class='add'>but</span> loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them <span class='add'>but</span> dung, that I may win Christ,
<span class="verse" id="PP3_9">9&#160;</span> And be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith:
<span class="verse" id="PP3_10">10&#160;</span> That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death;
<span class="verse" id="PP3_11">11&#160;</span> If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_12">12&#160;</span> Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_13">13&#160;</span> Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but <span class='add'>this</span> one thing <span class='add'>I do</span>, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
<span class="verse" id="PP3_14">14&#160;</span> I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_15">15&#160;</span> Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_16">16&#160;</span> Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_17">17&#160;</span> Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample.
<span class="verse" id="PP3_18">18&#160;</span>(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, <span class='add'>that they are</span> the enemies of the cross of Christ:
<span class="verse" id="PP3_19">19&#160;</span> Whose end <span class='add'>is</span> destruction, whose God <span class='add'>is their</span> belly, and <span class='add'>whose</span> glory <span class='add'>is</span> in their shame, who mind earthly things.)
<span class="verse" id="PP3_20">20&#160;</span> For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:
<span class="verse" id="PP3_21">21&#160;</span> Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PP4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP4_1">1&#160;</span> Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, <span class='add'>my</span> dearly beloved.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_2">2&#160;</span> I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_3">3&#160;</span> And I intreat thee also, true yokefellow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and <span class='add'>with</span> other my fellowlabourers, whose names <span class='add'>are</span> in the book of life.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_4">4&#160;</span> Rejoice in the Lord alway: <span class='add'>and</span> again I say, Rejoice.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_5">5&#160;</span> Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord <span class='add'>is</span> at hand.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_6">6&#160;</span> Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>requests be made known unto God.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_7">7&#160;</span> And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_8">8&#160;</span> Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>honest, whatsoever things <span class='add'>are</span> just, whatsoever things <span class='add'>are</span> pure, whatsoever things <span class='add'>are</span> lovely, whatsoever things <span class='add'>are</span> of good report; if <span class='add'>there be</span> any virtue, and if <span class='add'>there be</span> any praise, think on these things.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_9">9&#160;</span> Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do: and the God of peace shall be with you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP4_10">10&#160;</span> But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked opportunity.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_11">11&#160;</span> Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, <span class='add'>therewith</span> to be content.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_12">12&#160;</span> I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_13">13&#160;</span> I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_14">14&#160;</span> Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my affliction.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_15">15&#160;</span> Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_16">16&#160;</span> For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessity.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_17">17&#160;</span> Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your account.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_18">18&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>I have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things <span class='add'>which were sent</span> from you, an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing to God.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_19">19&#160;</span> But my God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_20">20&#160;</span> Now unto God and our Father <span class='add'>be</span> glory for ever and ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PP4_21">21&#160;</span> Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me greet you.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_22">22&#160;</span> All the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar’s household.
<span class="verse" id="PP4_23">23&#160;</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ <span class='add'>be</span> with you all. Amen. </div>
<div class='s'>It was written to the Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">mention.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">will finish</span> it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">you have me in your heart.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">partakers with me of grace.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">sense.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">try.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">differ.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">for Christ.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">Cæsar’s court.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to all others.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">habit.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">sincere.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">shine ye.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">poured forth.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">Moreover.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">so dear unto me.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP2_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">honour such.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP4_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 request]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP4_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">venerable.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP4_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">is revived.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PP4_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">I have received all.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
