<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Proverbs 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Proverbs</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR31_0'>31</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='PR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Proverbs  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="PR1_1">1&#160;</span> The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="PR1_2">2&#160;</span> To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding;
<span class="verse" id="PR1_3">3&#160;</span> To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>equity;
<span class="verse" id="PR1_4">4&#160;</span> To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>discretion.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_5">5&#160;</span> A wise <span class='add'>man</span> will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_6">6&#160;</span> To understand a proverb, and <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the beginning of knowledge: <span class='add'>but</span> fools despise wisdom and instruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_8">8&#160;</span> My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_9">9&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_11">11&#160;</span> If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_12">12&#160;</span> Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_13">13&#160;</span> We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_14">14&#160;</span> Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have one purse:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_15">15&#160;</span> My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their path:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_17">17&#160;</span> Surely in vain the net is spread <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the sight of any bird.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_18">18&#160;</span> And they lay wait for their <span class='add'>own</span> blood; they lurk privily for their <span class='add'>own</span> lives.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_19">19&#160;</span>So <span class='add'>are</span> the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; <span class='add'>which</span> taketh away the life of the owners thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_21">21&#160;</span> She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, <span class='add'>saying</span>,
<span class="verse" id="PR1_22">22&#160;</span> How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?
<span class="verse" id="PR1_23">23&#160;</span> Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_24">24&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded;
<span class="verse" id="PR1_25">25&#160;</span> But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_26">26&#160;</span> I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh;
<span class="verse" id="PR1_27">27&#160;</span> When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_29">29&#160;</span> For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_30">30&#160;</span> They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_31">31&#160;</span> Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_32">32&#160;</span> For the <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_33">33&#160;</span> But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_1">1&#160;</span> My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_2">2&#160;</span> So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, <span class='add'>and</span> apply thine heart to understanding;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_3">3&#160;</span> Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>liftest up thy voice for understanding;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as <span class='add'>for</span> hid treasures;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_5">5&#160;</span> Then shalt thou understand the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and find the knowledge of God.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> giveth wisdom: out of his mouth <span class='add'>cometh</span> knowledge and understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_7">7&#160;</span> He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: <span class='add'>he is</span> a buckler to them that walk uprightly.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_8">8&#160;</span> He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_9">9&#160;</span> Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; <span class='add'>yea</span>, every good path. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_11">11&#160;</span> Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee:
<span class="verse" id="PR2_12">12&#160;</span> To deliver thee from the way of the evil <span class='add'>man</span>, from the man that speaketh froward things;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_13">13&#160;</span> Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_14">14&#160;</span> Who rejoice to do evil, <span class='add'>and</span> delight in the frowardness of the wicked;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_15">15&#160;</span> Whose ways <span class='add'>are</span> crooked, and <span class='add'>they</span> froward in their paths:
<span class="verse" id="PR2_16">16&#160;</span> To deliver thee from the strange woman, <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>even</span> from the stranger <span class='add'>which</span> flattereth with her words;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_17">17&#160;</span> Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_18">18&#160;</span> For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_19">19&#160;</span> None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_20">20&#160;</span> That thou mayest walk in the way of good <span class='add'>men</span>, and keep the paths of the righteous.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it.
<span class="verse" id="PR2_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rooted out of it.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_1">1&#160;</span> My son, forget not my law; <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but let thine heart keep my commandments:
<span class="verse" id="PR3_2">2&#160;</span> For length of days, and <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>long life, and peace, shall they add to thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_3">3&#160;</span> Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thine heart:
<span class="verse" id="PR3_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> So shalt thou find favour and <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>good understanding in the sight of God and man.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and depart from evil.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_8">8&#160;</span> It shall be <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>health to thy navel, and <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>marrow to thy bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Honour the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase:
<span class="verse" id="PR3_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_11">11&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My son, despise not the chastening of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; neither be weary of his correction:
<span class="verse" id="PR3_12">12&#160;</span> For whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son <span class='add'>in whom</span> he delighteth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Happy <span class='add'>is</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> findeth wisdom, and <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the man <span class='add'>that</span> getteth understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the merchandise of it <span class='add'>is</span> better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_15">15&#160;</span>She <span class='add'>is</span> more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_16">16&#160;</span> Length of days <span class='add'>is</span> in her right hand; <span class='add'>and</span> in her left hand riches and honour.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_17">17&#160;</span> Her ways <span class='add'>are</span> ways of pleasantness, and all her paths <span class='add'>are</span> peace.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_18">18&#160;</span>She <span class='add'>is</span> a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy <span class='add'>is every one</span> that retaineth her.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_19">19&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>established the heavens.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_20">20&#160;</span> By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_21">21&#160;</span>¶ My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion:
<span class="verse" id="PR3_22">22&#160;</span> So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_24">24&#160;</span> When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_25">25&#160;</span> Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_26">26&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Withhold not good from <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_28">28&#160;</span> Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_31">31&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Envy thou not <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_32">32&#160;</span> For the froward <span class='add'>is</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but his secret <span class='add'>is</span> with the righteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_33">33&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The curse of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the just.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_35">35&#160;</span> The wise shall inherit glory: but shame <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be the promotion of fools.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_1">1&#160;</span> Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_2">2&#160;</span> For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_3">3&#160;</span> For I was my father’s son, <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tender and only <span class='add'>beloved</span> in the sight of my mother.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandments, and live.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_5">5&#160;</span> Get wisdom, get understanding: forget <span class='add'>it</span> not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_6">6&#160;</span> Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_7">7&#160;</span> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> the principal thing; <span class='add'>therefore</span> get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_8">8&#160;</span> Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_9">9&#160;</span> She shall give to thine head <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>an ornament of grace: <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_10">10&#160;</span> Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life shall be many.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_11">11&#160;</span> I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right paths.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_12">12&#160;</span> When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_13">13&#160;</span> Take fast hold of instruction; let <span class='add'>her</span> not go: keep her; for she <span class='add'>is</span> thy life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil <span class='add'>men</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_15">15&#160;</span> Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_16">16&#160;</span> For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause <span class='add'>some</span> to fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_17">17&#160;</span> For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_18">18&#160;</span> But the path of the just <span class='add'>is</span> as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_19">19&#160;</span> The way of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> as darkness: they know not at what they stumble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_20">20&#160;</span>¶ My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_21">21&#160;</span> Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_22">22&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>are</span> life unto those that find them, and <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>health to all their flesh.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Keep thy heart <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with all diligence; for out of it <span class='add'>are</span> the issues of life.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_24">24&#160;</span> Put away from thee <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_25">25&#160;</span> Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_26">26&#160;</span> Ponder the path of thy feet, and <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>let all thy ways be established.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_1">1&#160;</span> My son, attend unto my wisdom, <span class='add'>and</span> bow thine ear to my understanding:
<span class="verse" id="PR5_2">2&#160;</span> That thou mayest regard discretion, and <span class='add'>that</span> thy lips may keep knowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_3">3&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For the lips of a strange woman drop <span class='add'>as</span> an honeycomb, and her <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mouth <span class='add'>is</span> smoother than oil:
<span class="verse" id="PR5_4">4&#160;</span> But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a twoedged sword.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_6">6&#160;</span> Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, <span class='add'>that</span> thou canst not know <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_7">7&#160;</span> Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words of my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_8">8&#160;</span> Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house:
<span class="verse" id="PR5_9">9&#160;</span> Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel:
<span class="verse" id="PR5_10">10&#160;</span> Lest strangers be filled with <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy wealth; and thy labours <span class='add'>be</span> in the house of a stranger;
<span class="verse" id="PR5_11">11&#160;</span> And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed,
<span class="verse" id="PR5_12">12&#160;</span> And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof;
<span class="verse" id="PR5_13">13&#160;</span> And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me!
<span class="verse" id="PR5_14">14&#160;</span> I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_16">16&#160;</span> Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, <span class='add'>and</span> rivers of waters in the streets.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_17">17&#160;</span> Let them be only thine own, and not strangers’ with thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_18">18&#160;</span> Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Let her be as</span> the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>satisfy thee at all times; and <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>be thou ravished always with her love.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_20">20&#160;</span> And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?
<span class="verse" id="PR5_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the ways of man <span class='add'>are</span> before the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he pondereth all his goings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_22">22&#160;</span>¶ His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sins.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_23">23&#160;</span> He shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_1">1&#160;</span> My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, <span class='add'>if</span> thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger,
<span class="verse" id="PR6_2">2&#160;</span> Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_3">3&#160;</span> Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when thou art come into the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and make sure thy friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_4">4&#160;</span> Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_5">5&#160;</span> Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand <span class='add'>of the hunter</span>, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_7">7&#160;</span> Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler,
<span class="verse" id="PR6_8">8&#160;</span> Provideth her meat in the summer, <span class='add'>and</span> gathereth her food in the harvest.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?
<span class="verse" id="PR6_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_12">12&#160;</span>¶ A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_13">13&#160;</span> He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers;
<span class="verse" id="PR6_14">14&#160;</span> Frowardness <span class='add'>is</span> in his heart, he deviseth mischief continually; he <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>soweth discord.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ These six <span class='add'>things</span> doth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hate: yea, seven <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unto him:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
<span class="verse" id="PR6_18">18&#160;</span> An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>feet that be swift in running to mischief,
<span class="verse" id="PR6_19">19&#160;</span> A false witness <span class='add'>that</span> speaketh lies, and <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>he that soweth discord among brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_20">20&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My son, keep thy father’s commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_21">21&#160;</span> Bind them continually upon thine heart, <span class='add'>and</span> tie them about thy neck.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_22">22&#160;</span> When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and <span class='add'>when</span> thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the commandment <span class='add'>is</span> a <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamp; and the law <span class='add'>is</span> light; and reproofs of instruction <span class='add'>are</span> the way of life:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of the tongue of a strange woman.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_26">26&#160;</span> For by means of a whorish woman <span class='add'>a man is brought</span> to a piece of bread: and <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_27">27&#160;</span> Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
<span class="verse" id="PR6_28">28&#160;</span> Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned?
<span class="verse" id="PR6_29">29&#160;</span> So he that goeth in to his neighbour’s wife; whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Men</span> do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry;
<span class="verse" id="PR6_31">31&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>if</span> he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understanding: he <span class='add'>that</span> doeth it destroyeth his own soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_33">33&#160;</span> A wound and dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_34">34&#160;</span> For jealousy <span class='add'>is</span> the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_1">1&#160;</span> My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_2">2&#160;</span> Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_4">4&#160;</span> Say unto wisdom, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my sister; and call understanding <span class='add'>thy</span> kinswoman:
<span class="verse" id="PR7_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger <span class='add'>which</span> flattereth with her words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_6">6&#160;</span>¶ For at the window of my house I looked through my casement,
<span class="verse" id="PR7_7">7&#160;</span> And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the youths, a young man void of understanding,
<span class="verse" id="PR7_8">8&#160;</span> Passing through the street near her corner; and he went the way to her house,
<span class="verse" id="PR7_9">9&#160;</span> In the twilight, <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the evening, in the black and dark night:
<span class="verse" id="PR7_10">10&#160;</span> And, behold, there met him a woman <span class='add'>with</span> the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>(She <span class='add'>is</span> loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house:
<span class="verse" id="PR7_12">12&#160;</span> Now <span class='add'>is she</span> without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every corner.)
<span class="verse" id="PR7_13">13&#160;</span> So she caught him, and kissed him, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with an impudent face said unto him,
<span class="verse" id="PR7_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='add'>I have</span> peace offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_16">16&#160;</span> I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved <span class='add'>works</span>, with fine linen of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_17">17&#160;</span> I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_18">18&#160;</span> Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_19">19&#160;</span> For the goodman <span class='add'>is</span> not at home, he is gone a long journey:
<span class="verse" id="PR7_20">20&#160;</span> He hath taken a bag of money <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with him, <span class='add'>and</span> will come home at <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the day appointed.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_21">21&#160;</span> With <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_22">22&#160;</span> He goeth after her <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks;
<span class="verse" id="PR7_23">23&#160;</span> Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it <span class='add'>is</span> for his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of my mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_25">25&#160;</span> Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_26">26&#160;</span> For she hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong <span class='add'>men</span> have been slain by her.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Her house <span class='add'>is</span> the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_1">1&#160;</span> Doth not <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?
<span class="verse" id="PR8_2">2&#160;</span> She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_3">3&#160;</span> She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_4">4&#160;</span> Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice <span class='add'>is</span> to the sons of man.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_5">5&#160;</span> O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_6">6&#160;</span> Hear; for I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my lips <span class='add'>shall be</span> right things.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_7">7&#160;</span> For my mouth shall speak truth; and wickedness <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an abomination to my lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_8">8&#160;</span> All the words of my mouth <span class='add'>are</span> in righteousness; <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>froward or perverse in them.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_9">9&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_10">10&#160;</span> Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_12">12&#160;</span> I wisdom dwell with <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_13">13&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_14">14&#160;</span> Counsel <span class='add'>is</span> mine, and sound wisdom: I <span class='add'>am</span> understanding; I have strength.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_15">15&#160;</span> By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_16">16&#160;</span> By me princes rule, and nobles, <span class='add'>even</span> all the judges of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_17">17&#160;</span> I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Riches and honour <span class='add'>are</span> with me; <span class='add'>yea</span>, durable riches and righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> My fruit <span class='add'>is</span> better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_20">20&#160;</span> I <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_21">21&#160;</span> That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_22">22&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_23">23&#160;</span> I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_24">24&#160;</span>When <span class='add'>there were</span> no depths, I was brought forth; when <span class='add'>there were</span> no fountains abounding with water.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_25">25&#160;</span> Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_26">26&#160;</span> While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the <a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fields, nor <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the highest part of the dust of the world.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_27">27&#160;</span> When he prepared the heavens, I <span class='add'>was</span> there: when he set <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a compass upon the face of the depth:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_28">28&#160;</span> When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_30">30&#160;</span> Then I was by him, <span class='add'>as</span> one brought up <span class='add'>with him:</span> and I was daily <span class='add'>his</span> delight, rejoicing always before him;
<span class="verse" id="PR8_31">31&#160;</span> Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights <span class='add'>were</span> with the sons of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_32">32&#160;</span> Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>blessed <span class='add'>are they that</span> keep my ways.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_33">33&#160;</span> Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_34">34&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_35">35&#160;</span> For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>obtain favour of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_36">36&#160;</span> But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_1">1&#160;</span> Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars:
<span class="verse" id="PR9_2">2&#160;</span> She hath killed <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_3">3&#160;</span> She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city,
<span class="verse" id="PR9_4">4&#160;</span>Whoso <span class='add'>is</span> simple, let him turn in hither: <span class='add'>as for</span> him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,
<span class="verse" id="PR9_5">5&#160;</span> Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine <span class='add'>which</span> I have mingled.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_6">6&#160;</span> Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_7">7&#160;</span> He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked <span class='add'>man getteth</span> himself a blot.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_9">9&#160;</span> Give <span class='add'>instruction</span> to a wise <span class='add'>man</span>, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just <span class='add'>man</span>, and he will increase in learning.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy <span class='add'>is</span> understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_12">12&#160;</span> If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but <span class='add'>if</span> thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_13">13&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A foolish woman <span class='add'>is</span> clamorous: <span class='add'>she is</span> simple, and knoweth nothing.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_14">14&#160;</span> For she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city,
<span class="verse" id="PR9_15">15&#160;</span> To call passengers who go right on their ways:
<span class="verse" id="PR9_16">16&#160;</span>Whoso <span class='add'>is</span> simple, let him turn in hither: and <span class='add'>as for</span> him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him,
<span class="verse" id="PR9_17">17&#160;</span> Stolen waters are sweet, and bread <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>eaten</span> in secret is pleasant.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_18">18&#160;</span> But he knoweth not that the dead <span class='add'>are</span> there; <span class='add'>and that</span> her guests <span class='add'>are</span> in the depths of hell.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_1">1&#160;</span> The proverbs of Solomon. <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish son <span class='add'>is</span> the heaviness of his mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivereth from death.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he casteth away <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the substance of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He becometh poor that dealeth <span class='add'>with</span> a slack hand: but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_5">5&#160;</span> He that gathereth in summer <span class='add'>is</span> a wise son: <span class='add'>but</span> he that sleepeth in harvest <span class='add'>is</span> a son that causeth shame.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_6">6&#160;</span> Blessings <span class='add'>are</span> upon the head of the just: but <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The memory of the just <span class='add'>is</span> blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_8">8&#160;</span> The wise in heart will receive commandments: but <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a prating fool <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The mouth of a righteous <span class='add'>man is</span> a well of life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_12">12&#160;</span> Hatred stirreth up strifes: but <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>love covereth all sins.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_13">13&#160;</span> In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a rod <span class='add'>is</span> for the back of him that is void of <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_14">14&#160;</span> Wise <span class='add'>men</span> lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish <span class='add'>is</span> near destruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The rich man’s wealth <span class='add'>is</span> his strong city: the destruction of the poor <span class='add'>is</span> their poverty.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_16">16&#160;</span> The labour of the righteous <span class='add'>tendeth</span> to life: the fruit of the wicked to sin.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_17">17&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is in</span> the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>erreth.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_18">18&#160;</span> He that hideth hatred <span class='add'>with</span> lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander, <span class='add'>is</span> a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_19">19&#160;</span> In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his lips <span class='add'>is</span> wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_20">20&#160;</span> The tongue of the just <span class='add'>is as</span> choice silver: the heart of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> little worth.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_21">21&#160;</span> The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_22">22&#160;</span> The blessing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> as <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of understanding hath wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_24">24&#160;</span> The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire of the righteous shall be granted.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_25">25&#160;</span> As the whirlwind passeth, so <span class='add'>is</span> the wicked no <span class='add'>more:</span> but the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> an everlasting foundation.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_26">26&#160;</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so <span class='add'>is</span> the sluggard to them that send him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_28">28&#160;</span> The hope of the righteous <span class='add'>shall be</span> gladness: but the <a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>expectation of the wicked shall perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_29">29&#160;</span> The way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> strength to the upright: but destruction <span class='add'>shall be</span> to the workers of iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not inhabit the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_31">31&#160;</span> The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward tongue shall be cut out.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_32">32&#160;</span> The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of the wicked <span class='add'>speaketh</span> <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>frowardness.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_1">1&#160;</span> A <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>false balance <span class='add'>is</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a just weight <span class='add'>is</span> his delight.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>When</span> pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_5">5&#160;</span> The righteousness of the perfect shall <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>direct his way: but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_6">6&#160;</span> The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>transgressors shall be taken in <span class='add'>their own</span> naughtiness.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_7">7&#160;</span> When a wicked man dieth, <span class='add'>his</span> expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust <span class='add'>men</span> perisheth.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_9">9&#160;</span> An <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hypocrite with <span class='add'>his</span> mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through knowledge shall the just be delivered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_10">10&#160;</span> When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when the wicked perish, <span class='add'>there is</span> shouting.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_11">11&#160;</span> By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_12">12&#160;</span> He that is <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Where no counsel <span class='add'>is</span>, the people fall: but in the multitude of counsellors <span class='add'>there is</span> safety.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_15">15&#160;</span> He that is surety for a stranger <a href='#FN151' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall smart <span class='add'>for it:</span> and he that hateth <a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>suretiship is sure.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_16">16&#160;</span> A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong <span class='add'>men</span> retain riches.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_17">17&#160;</span> The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> cruel troubleth his own flesh.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_18">18&#160;</span> The wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that soweth righteousness <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sure reward.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_19">19&#160;</span> As righteousness <span class='add'>tendeth</span> to life: so he that pursueth evil <span class='add'>pursueth it</span> to his own death.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_20">20&#160;</span> They that are of a froward heart <span class='add'>are</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <span class='add'>such as are</span> upright in <span class='add'>their</span> way <span class='add'>are</span> his delight.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Though</span> hand <span class='add'>join</span> in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> a jewel of gold in a swine’s snout, <span class='add'>so is</span> a fair woman which <a href='#FN153' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is without discretion.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_23">23&#160;</span> The desire of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> only good: <span class='add'>but</span> the expectation of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> wrath.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_24">24&#160;</span> There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and <span class='add'>there is</span> that withholdeth more than is meet, but <span class='add'>it tendeth</span> to poverty.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN154' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN155' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth shall be watered also himself.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_26">26&#160;</span> He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon the head of him that selleth <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_27">27&#160;</span> He that diligently seeketh good procureth favour: <a href='#FN156' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_28">28&#160;</span> He that trusteth in his riches shall fall: but <a href='#FN157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the righteous shall flourish as a branch.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_29">29&#160;</span> He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind: and the fool <span class='add'>shall be</span> servant to the wise of heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_30">30&#160;</span> The fruit of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> a tree of life; and he that <a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>winneth souls <span class='add'>is</span> wise.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN159' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more the wicked and the sinner.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_1">1&#160;</span> Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reproof <span class='add'>is</span> brutish.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_2">2&#160;</span> A good <span class='add'>man</span> obtaineth favour of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but a man of wicked devices will he condemn.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_3">3&#160;</span> A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the <a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>root of the righteous shall not be moved.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN161' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A virtuous woman <span class='add'>is</span> a crown to her husband: but she that maketh ashamed <span class='add'>is</span> as rottenness in his bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_5">5&#160;</span> The thoughts of the righteous <span class='add'>are</span> right: <span class='add'>but</span> the counsels of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> deceit.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN162' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The words of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN163' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The wicked are overthrown, and <span class='add'>are</span> not: but the house of the righteous shall stand.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_8">8&#160;</span> A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but he that is <a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of a perverse heart shall be despised.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> despised, and hath a servant, <span class='add'>is</span> better than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_10">10&#160;</span> A righteous <span class='add'>man</span> regardeth the life of his beast: but the <a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>tender mercies of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> cruel.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN166' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that followeth vain <span class='add'>persons is</span> void of understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_12">12&#160;</span> The wicked desireth <a href='#FN167' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the net of evil <span class='add'>men:</span> but the root of the righteous yieldeth <span class='add'>fruit</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN169' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The wicked is snared by the transgression of <span class='add'>his</span> lips: but the just shall come out of trouble.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN170' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of <span class='add'>his</span> mouth: and the recompence of a man’s hands shall be rendered unto him.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The way of a fool <span class='add'>is</span> right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto counsel <span class='add'>is</span> wise.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_16">16&#160;</span> A fool’s wrath is <a href='#FN172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>presently known: but a prudent <span class='add'>man</span> covereth shame.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>He that</span> speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness: but a false witness deceit.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> health.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_19">19&#160;</span> The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue <span class='add'>is</span> but for a moment.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_20">20&#160;</span> Deceit <span class='add'>is</span> in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counsellors of peace <span class='add'>is</span> joy.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_21">21&#160;</span> There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked shall be filled with mischief.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_22">22&#160;</span> Lying lips <span class='add'>are</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but they that deal truly <span class='add'>are</span> his delight.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN175' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN176' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the <a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>slothful shall be under tribute.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN178' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good word maketh it glad.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_26">26&#160;</span> The righteous <span class='add'>is</span> more <a href='#FN179' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>excellent than his neighbour: but the way of the wicked seduceth them.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_27">27&#160;</span> The slothful <span class='add'>man</span> roasteth not that which he took in hunting: but the substance of a diligent man <span class='add'>is</span> precious.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_28">28&#160;</span> In the way of righteousness <span class='add'>is</span> life; and <span class='add'>in</span> the pathway <span class='add'>thereof there is</span> no death.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_1">1&#160;</span> A wise son <span class='add'>heareth</span> his father’s instruction: but a scorner heareth not rebuke.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN180' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man shall eat good by the fruit of <span class='add'>his</span> mouth: but the soul of the transgressors <span class='add'>shall eat</span> violence.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_3">3&#160;</span> He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life: <span class='add'>but</span> he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_4">4&#160;</span> The soul of the sluggard desireth, and <span class='add'>hath</span> nothing: but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_5">5&#160;</span> A righteous <span class='add'>man</span> hateth lying: but a wicked <span class='add'>man</span> is loathsome, and cometh to shame.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN181' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Righteousness keepeth <span class='add'>him that is</span> upright in the way: but wickedness overthroweth <a href='#FN182' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the sinner.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_7">7&#160;</span> There is that maketh himself rich, yet <span class='add'>hath</span> nothing: <span class='add'>there is</span> that maketh himself poor, yet <span class='add'>hath</span> great riches.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_8">8&#160;</span> The ransom of a man’s life <span class='add'>are</span> his riches: but the poor heareth not rebuke.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_9">9&#160;</span> The light of the righteous rejoiceth: <a href='#FN183' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but the <a href='#FN184' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_10">10&#160;</span> Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wealth <span class='add'>gotten</span> by vanity shall be diminished: but he that gathereth <a href='#FN186' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by labour shall increase.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_12">12&#160;</span> Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but <span class='add'>when</span> the desire cometh, <span class='add'>it is</span> a tree of life.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_13">13&#160;</span> Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth the commandment <a href='#FN187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall be rewarded.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The law of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_15">15&#160;</span> Good understanding giveth favour: but the way of transgressors <span class='add'>is</span> hard.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN189' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Every prudent <span class='add'>man</span> dealeth with knowledge: but a fool <a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>layeth open <span class='add'>his</span> folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_17">17&#160;</span> A wicked messenger falleth into mischief: but a faithful ambassador <span class='add'>is</span> health.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_18">18&#160;</span> Poverty and shame <span class='add'>shall be to</span> him that refuseth instruction: but he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_19">19&#160;</span> The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but <span class='add'>it is</span> abomination to fools to depart from evil.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_20">20&#160;</span> He that walketh with wise <span class='add'>men</span> shall be wise: but a companion of fools <a href='#FN191' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_21">21&#160;</span> Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall be repayed.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_22">22&#160;</span> A good <span class='add'>man</span> leaveth an inheritance to his children’s children: and the <a href='#FN192' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wealth of the sinner <span class='add'>is</span> laid up for the just.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN193' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Much food <span class='add'>is in</span> the tillage of the poor: but there is <span class='add'>that is</span> destroyed for want of judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN194' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN195' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the belly of the wicked shall want.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_1">1&#160;</span> Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_2">2&#160;</span> He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <a href='#FN196' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse in his ways despiseth him.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_3">3&#160;</span> In the mouth of the foolish <span class='add'>is</span> a rod of pride: but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_4">4&#160;</span> Where no oxen <span class='add'>are</span>, the crib <span class='add'>is</span> clean: but much increase <span class='add'>is</span> by the strength of the ox.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter lies.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_6">6&#160;</span> A scorner seeketh wisdom, and <span class='add'>findeth it</span> not: but <a href='#FN198' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>knowledge <span class='add'>is</span> easy unto him that understandeth.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_7">7&#160;</span> Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not <span class='add'>in him</span> the lips of knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_8">8&#160;</span> The wisdom of the prudent <span class='add'>is</span> to understand his way: but the folly of fools <span class='add'>is</span> deceit.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN199' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous <span class='add'>there is</span> favour.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_10">10&#160;</span> The heart knoweth <a href='#FN200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his own bitterness; and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_11">11&#160;</span> The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN201' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof <span class='add'>are</span> the ways of death.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_13">13&#160;</span> Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth <span class='add'>is</span> heaviness.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_14">14&#160;</span> The backslider in heart shall be <a href='#FN202' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>filled with his own ways: and a good man <span class='add'>shall be satisfied</span> from himself.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_15">15&#160;</span> The simple believeth every word: but the prudent <span class='add'>man</span> looketh well to his going.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_16">16&#160;</span> A wise <span class='add'>man</span> feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool rageth, and is confident.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> soon angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is hated.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_18">18&#160;</span> The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_19">19&#160;</span> The evil bow before the good; and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN203' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but <a href='#FN204' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the rich <span class='add'>hath</span> many friends.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_21">21&#160;</span> He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: <a href='#FN205' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but he that hath mercy on the poor, happy <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_22">22&#160;</span> Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth <span class='add'>shall be</span> to them that devise good.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_23">23&#160;</span> In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips <span class='add'>tendeth</span> only to penury.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_24">24&#160;</span> The crown of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> their riches: <span class='add'>but</span> the foolishness of fools <span class='add'>is</span> folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN206' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A true witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful <span class='add'>witness</span> speaketh lies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_26">26&#160;</span> In the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> strong confidence: and his children shall have a place of refuge.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN207' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_28">28&#160;</span> In the multitude of people <span class='add'>is</span> the king’s honour: but in the want of people <span class='add'>is</span> the destruction of the prince.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> slow to wrath <span class='add'>is</span> of great understanding: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> <a href='#FN208' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>hasty of spirit exalteth folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_30">30&#160;</span> A sound heart <span class='add'>is</span> the life of the flesh: but envy the rottenness of the bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker: but he that honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_32">32&#160;</span> The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous hath hope in his death.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_33">33&#160;</span> Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but <span class='add'>that which is</span> in the midst of fools is made known.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_34">34&#160;</span> Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin <span class='add'>is</span> a reproach <a href='#FN210' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to any people.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_35">35&#160;</span> The king’s favour <span class='add'>is</span> toward a wise servant: but his wrath is <span class='add'>against</span> him that causeth shame.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_1">1&#160;</span> A <a href='#FN211' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_2">2&#160;</span> The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: <a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but the mouth of fools <a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>poureth out foolishness.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>are</span> in every place, beholding the evil and the good.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> A wholesome tongue <span class='add'>is</span> a tree of life: but perverseness therein <span class='add'>is</span> a breach in the spirit.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN216' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A fool despiseth his father’s instruction: but he that regardeth reproof is prudent.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_6">6&#160;</span> In the house of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> much treasure: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_7">7&#160;</span> The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish <span class='add'>doeth</span> not so.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The sacrifice of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but the prayer of the upright <span class='add'>is</span> his delight.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_9">9&#160;</span> The way of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but he loveth him that followeth after righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Correction <span class='add'>is</span> grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: <span class='add'>and</span> he that hateth reproof shall die.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hell and destruction <span class='add'>are</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: how much more then the hearts of the children of men?
<span class="verse" id="PR15_12">12&#160;</span> A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him: neither will he go unto the wise.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_14">14&#160;</span> The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge: but the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_15">15&#160;</span> All the days of the afflicted <span class='add'>are</span> evil: but he that is of a merry heart <span class='add'>hath</span> a continual feast. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN221' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Better <span class='add'>is</span> little with the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> than great treasure and trouble therewith.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN222' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Better <span class='add'>is</span> a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN223' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> slow to anger appeaseth strife.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_19">19&#160;</span> The way of the slothful <span class='add'>man is</span> as an hedge of thorns: but the way of the righteous <a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>is</span> made plain.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his mother.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN226' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Folly <span class='add'>is</span> joy to <span class='add'>him that is</span> <a href='#FN227' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destitute of wisdom: but a man of understanding walketh uprightly.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN228' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of counsellors they are established.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_23">23&#160;</span> A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word <span class='add'>spoken</span> <a href='#FN229' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in due season, how good <span class='add'>is it</span>!
<span class="verse" id="PR15_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The way of life <span class='add'>is</span> above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN231' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish the border of the widow.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The thoughts of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <span class='add'>the words</span> of the pure <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant words.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_27">27&#160;</span> He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_28">28&#160;</span> The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of the righteous.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_30">30&#160;</span> The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: <span class='add'>and</span> a good report maketh the bones fat.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_31">31&#160;</span> The ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_32">32&#160;</span> He that refuseth <a href='#FN235' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that <a href='#FN236' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>heareth reproof <a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>getteth understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_33">33&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the instruction of wisdom; and <a href='#FN238' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>before honour <span class='add'>is</span> humility.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_1">1&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN239' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, <span class='add'>is</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN241' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All the ways of a man <span class='add'>are</span> clean in his own eyes; but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> weigheth the spirits.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN242' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Commit thy works unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thy thoughts shall be established.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_4">4&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made all <span class='add'>things</span> for himself: <a href='#FN244' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN245' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Every one <span class='add'>that is</span> proud in heart <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>though</span> hand <span class='add'>join</span> in hand, he shall not be <a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unpunished.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_6">6&#160;</span> By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>men</span> depart from evil.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_7">7&#160;</span> When a man’s ways please the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN247' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Better <span class='add'>is</span> a little with righteousness than great revenues without right.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man’s heart deviseth his way: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> directeth his steps.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN249' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> A divine sentence <span class='add'>is</span> in the lips of the king: his mouth transgresseth not in judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN250' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A just weight and balance <span class='add'>are</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>: <a href='#FN251' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>all the weights of the bag <span class='add'>are</span> his work.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for the throne is established by righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_13">13&#160;</span> Righteous lips <span class='add'>are</span> the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_14">14&#160;</span> The wrath of a king <span class='add'>is as</span> messengers of death: but a wise man will pacify it.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_15">15&#160;</span> In the light of the king’s countenance <span class='add'>is</span> life; and <a href='#FN252' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his favour <span class='add'>is</span> as a cloud of the latter rain.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN253' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> How much better <span class='add'>is it</span> to get wisdom than gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver!
<span class="verse" id="PR16_17">17&#160;</span> The highway of the upright <span class='add'>is</span> to depart from evil: he that keepeth his way preserveth his soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN254' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Pride <span class='add'>goeth</span> before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_19">19&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>it is to be</span> of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: and whoso <a href='#FN256' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>trusteth in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, happy <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_21">21&#160;</span> The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN257' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Understanding <span class='add'>is</span> a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but the instruction of fools <span class='add'>is</span> folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_23">23&#160;</span> The heart of the wise <a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_24">24&#160;</span> Pleasant words <span class='add'>are as</span> an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof <span class='add'>are</span> the ways of death.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN260' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth <a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>craveth it of him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips <span class='add'>there is</span> as a burning fire.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A froward man <a href='#FN264' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief friends.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_29">29&#160;</span> A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way <span class='add'>that is</span> not good.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_30">30&#160;</span> He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips he bringeth evil to pass.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_31">31&#160;</span> The hoary head <span class='add'>is</span> a crown of glory, <span class='add'>if</span> it be found in the way of righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> slow to anger <span class='add'>is</span> better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_33">33&#160;</span> The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof <span class='add'>is</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_1">1&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of <a href='#FN266' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sacrifices <span class='add'>with</span> strife.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_2">2&#160;</span> A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fining pot <span class='add'>is</span> for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> trieth the hearts.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_4">4&#160;</span> A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; <span class='add'>and</span> a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: <span class='add'>and</span> he that is glad at calamities shall not be <a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unpunished.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Children’s children <span class='add'>are</span> the crown of old men; and the glory of children <span class='add'>are</span> their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN271' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Excellent speech becometh not a fool: much less do <a href='#FN272' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lying lips a prince.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A gift <span class='add'>is as</span> a <a href='#FN274' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN275' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that covereth a transgression <a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth  <span class='add'>very</span> friends.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundred stripes into a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_11">11&#160;</span> An evil <span class='add'>man</span> seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_12">12&#160;</span> Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_13">13&#160;</span> Whoso <a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_14">14&#160;</span> The beginning of strife <span class='add'>is as</span> when one letteth out water: therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN279' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both <span class='add'>are</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_16">16&#160;</span>Wherefore <span class='add'>is there</span> a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing <span class='add'>he hath</span> no heart <span class='add'>to it</span>?
<span class="verse" id="PR17_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN280' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man void of <a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>understanding striketh hands, <span class='add'>and</span> becometh surety in the presence of his friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_19">19&#160;</span> He loveth transgression that loveth strife: <span class='add'>and</span> he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN283' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into mischief.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that begetteth a fool <span class='add'>doeth it</span> to his sorrow: and the father of a fool hath no joy.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN285' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A merry heart doeth good <a href='#FN286' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>like</span> a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_23">23&#160;</span> A wicked <span class='add'>man</span> taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool <span class='add'>are</span> in the ends of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A foolish son <span class='add'>is</span> a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_26">26&#160;</span> Also to punish the just <span class='add'>is</span> not good, <span class='add'>nor</span> to strike princes for equity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN289' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that hath knowledge spareth his words: <span class='add'>and</span> a man of understanding is of <a href='#FN290' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an excellent spirit.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN291' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: <span class='add'>and</span> he that shutteth his lips <span class='add'>is esteemed</span> a man of understanding.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh <span class='add'>and</span> intermeddleth with all wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_2">2&#160;</span> A fool hath no delight in understanding, but that his heart may discover itself.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_3">3&#160;</span> When the wicked cometh, <span class='add'>then</span> cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN293' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The words of a man’s mouth <span class='add'>are as</span> deep waters, <span class='add'>and</span> the wellspring of wisdom <span class='add'>as</span> a flowing brook.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_6">6&#160;</span> A fool’s lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for strokes.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN295' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A fool’s mouth <span class='add'>is</span> his destruction, and his lips <span class='add'>are</span> the snare of his soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The words of a <a href='#FN297' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>talebearer <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as wounds, and they go down into the <a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>innermost parts of the belly.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_9">9&#160;</span> He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and <a href='#FN301' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>is safe.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN302' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The rich man’s wealth <span class='add'>is</span> his strong city, and as an high wall in his own conceit.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honour <span class='add'>is</span> humility.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_13">13&#160;</span> He that <a href='#FN304' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>answereth a matter before he heareth <span class='add'>it</span>, it <span class='add'>is</span> folly and shame unto him.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_14">14&#160;</span> The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear?
<span class="verse" id="PR18_15">15&#160;</span> The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man’s gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great men.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> first in his own cause <span class='add'>seemeth</span> just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_18">18&#160;</span> The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the mighty.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_19">19&#160;</span> A brother offended <span class='add'>is harder to be won</span> than a strong city: and <span class='add'>their</span> contentions  <span class='add'>are</span> like the bars of a castle.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN306' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man’s belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; <span class='add'>and</span> with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_21">21&#160;</span> Death and life <span class='add'>are</span> in the power of the tongue: and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN307' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>Whoso</span> findeth a wife findeth a good <span class='add'>thing</span>, and obtaineth favour of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_23">23&#160;</span> The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth <a href='#FN308' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>roughly.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_24">24&#160;</span> A man <span class='add'>that hath</span> friends must shew himself friendly: <a href='#FN309' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and there is a friend <span class='add'>that</span> sticketh closer than a brother.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Better <span class='add'>is</span> the poor that walketh in his integrity, than <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse in his lips, and is a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_2">2&#160;</span>Also, <span class='add'>that</span> the soul <span class='add'>be</span> without knowledge, <span class='add'>it is</span> not good; and he that hasteth with <span class='add'>his</span> feet sinneth.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_3">3&#160;</span> The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wealth maketh many friends; but the poor is separated from his neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A false witness shall not be <a href='#FN313' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unpunished, and <span class='add'>he that</span> speaketh lies shall not escape.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_6">6&#160;</span> Many will intreat the favour of the prince: and every man <span class='add'>is</span> a friend to <a href='#FN314' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>him that giveth gifts.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his friends go far from him? he pursueth <span class='add'>them with</span> words, <span class='add'>yet</span> they <span class='add'>are</span> wanting <span class='add'>to him</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_8">8&#160;</span> He that getteth <a href='#FN316' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>wisdom loveth his own soul: he that keepeth understanding shall find good.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN317' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A false witness shall not be unpunished, and <span class='add'>he that</span> speaketh lies shall perish.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_10">10&#160;</span> Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less <a href='#FN318' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for a servant to have rule over princes.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The <a href='#FN320' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and <span class='add'>it is</span> his glory to pass over a transgression.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The king’s wrath <span class='add'>is</span> as the roaring of a lion; but his favour <span class='add'>is</span> as dew upon the grass.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN322' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A foolish son <span class='add'>is</span> the calamity of his father: <a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and the contentions of a wife <span class='add'>are</span> a continual dropping.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_14">14&#160;</span> House and riches <span class='add'>are</span> the inheritance of fathers: and <a href='#FN324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a prudent wife <span class='add'>is</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_15">15&#160;</span> Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and an idle soul <a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall suffer hunger.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN326' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; <span class='add'>but</span> he that despiseth his ways shall die.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and <a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that which he hath given will he pay him again.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare <a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for his crying.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_19">19&#160;</span> A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver <span class='add'>him</span>, yet thou must <a href='#FN331' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>do it again.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_20">20&#160;</span> Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN332' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>There are</span> many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless the counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that shall stand.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_22">22&#160;</span> The desire of a man <span class='add'>is</span> his kindness: and a poor man <span class='add'>is</span> better than a liar.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_23">23&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>tendeth</span> to life: and <span class='add'>he that hath it</span> shall abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with evil.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A slothful <span class='add'>man</span> hideth his hand in <span class='add'>his</span> bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Smite a scorner, and the simple <a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>will beware: and reprove one that hath understanding, <span class='add'>and</span> he will understand knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_26">26&#160;</span> He that wasteth <span class='add'>his</span> father, <span class='add'>and</span> chaseth away <span class='add'>his</span> mother, <span class='add'>is</span> a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_27">27&#160;</span> Cease, my son, to hear the instruction <span class='add'>that causeth</span> to err from the words of knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> An ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_29">29&#160;</span> Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_1">1&#160;</span> Wine <span class='add'>is</span> a mocker, strong drink <span class='add'>is</span> raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The fear of a king <span class='add'>is</span> as the roaring of a lion: <span class='add'>whoso</span> provoketh him to anger sinneth <span class='add'>against</span> his own soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will be meddling.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN338' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The sluggard will not plow by reason of the <a href='#FN339' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cold; <span class='add'>therefore</span> shall he beg in harvest, and <span class='add'>have</span> nothing.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Counsel in the heart of man <span class='add'>is like</span> deep water; but a man of understanding will draw it out.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_6">6&#160;</span> Most men will proclaim every one his own <a href='#FN341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>goodness: but a faithful man who can find?
<span class="verse" id="PR20_7">7&#160;</span> The just <span class='add'>man</span> walketh in his integrity: <a href='#FN342' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>his children <span class='add'>are</span> blessed after him.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_8">8&#160;</span> A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all evil with his eyes.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
<span class="verse" id="PR20_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN345' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Divers weights, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>divers measures, both of them <span class='add'>are</span> alike abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_11">11&#160;</span> Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work <span class='add'>be</span> pure, and whether <span class='add'>it be</span> right.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN347' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made even both of them.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN348' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, <span class='add'>and</span> thou shalt be satisfied with bread.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> naught, <span class='add'>it is</span> naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_15">15&#160;</span> There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge <span class='add'>are</span> a precious jewel.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take his garment that is surety <span class='add'>for</span> a stranger: and take a pledge of him for a strange woman.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Bread of deceit <span class='add'>is</span> sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN352' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>Every</span> purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice make war.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN353' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that goeth about <span class='add'>as</span> a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore meddle not with him that <a href='#FN354' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>flattereth with his lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his <a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_21">21&#160;</span> An inheritance <span class='add'>may be</span> gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end thereof shall not be blessed.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Say not thou, I will recompense evil; <span class='add'>but</span> wait on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he shall save thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN358' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Divers weights <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and <a href='#FN359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a false balance <span class='add'>is</span> not good.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN360' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Man’s goings <span class='add'>are</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; how can a man then understand his own way?
<span class="verse" id="PR20_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> a snare to the man <span class='add'>who</span> devoureth <span class='add'>that which is</span> holy, and after vows to make enquiry.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN361' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over them.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_27">27&#160;</span> The spirit of man <span class='add'>is</span> the <a href='#FN362' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>candle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, searching all the inward parts of the belly.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his throne is upholden by mercy.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_29">29&#160;</span> The glory of young men <span class='add'>is</span> their strength: and <a href='#FN364' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the beauty of old men <span class='add'>is</span> the gray head.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_30">30&#160;</span> The blueness of a wound <a href='#FN365' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cleanseth away evil: so <span class='add'>do</span> stripes the inward parts of the belly.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_1">1&#160;</span> The king’s heart <span class='add'>is</span> in the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>as</span> the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN366' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Every way of a man <span class='add'>is</span> right in his own eyes: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> pondereth the hearts.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN367' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> To do justice and judgment <span class='add'>is</span> more acceptable to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> than sacrifice.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN368' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> An high look, and a proud heart, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the plowing of the wicked, <span class='add'>is</span> sin.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_5">5&#160;</span> The thoughts of the diligent <span class='add'>tend</span> only to plenteousness; but of every one <span class='add'>that is</span> hasty only to want.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN371' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The getting of treasures by a lying tongue <span class='add'>is</span> a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_7">7&#160;</span> The robbery of the wicked shall <a href='#FN372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>destroy them; because they refuse to do judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_8">8&#160;</span> The way of man <span class='add'>is</span> froward and strange: but <span class='add'>as for</span> the pure, his work <span class='add'>is</span> right.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with <a href='#FN374' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a brawling woman in <a href='#FN375' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a wide house.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN376' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour <a href='#FN377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>findeth no favour in his eyes.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN378' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_12">12&#160;</span> The righteous <span class='add'>man</span> wisely considereth the house of the wicked: <span class='add'>but God</span> overthroweth the wicked for <span class='add'>their</span> wickedness.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN379' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN380' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom strong wrath.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction <span class='add'>shall be</span> to the workers of iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_16">16&#160;</span> The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_17">17&#160;</span> He that loveth <a href='#FN381' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>pleasure <span class='add'>shall be</span> a poor man: he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN382' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The wicked <span class='add'>shall be</span> a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN383' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to dwell <a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry woman.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_21">21&#160;</span> He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honour.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN385' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A wise <span class='add'>man</span> scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN386' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_24">24&#160;</span> Proud <span class='add'>and</span> haughty scorner <span class='add'>is</span> his name, who dealeth <a href='#FN387' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in proud wrath.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN388' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to labour.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_26">26&#160;</span> He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the <a href='#FN389' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>righteous giveth and spareth not.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN390' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The sacrifice of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> abomination: how much more, <span class='add'>when</span> he bringeth it <a href='#FN391' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with a wicked mind?
<span class="verse" id="PR21_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN392' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> A false witness shall perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_29">29&#160;</span> A wicked man hardeneth his face: but <span class='add'>as for</span> the upright, he <a href='#FN394' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>directeth his way.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN395' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>There is</span> no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN396' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The horse <span class='add'>is</span> prepared against the day of battle: but <a href='#FN397' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>safety <span class='add'>is</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A <span class='add'>good</span> name <span class='add'>is</span> rather to be chosen than great riches, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>loving favour rather than silver and gold.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The rich and poor meet together: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the maker of them all.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN402' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A prudent <span class='add'>man</span> foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN404' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> By humility <span class='add'>and</span> the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>are</span> riches, and honour, and life.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_5">5&#160;</span> Thorns <span class='add'>and</span> snares <span class='add'>are</span> in the way of the froward: he that doth keep his soul shall be far from them.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN405' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Train up a child <a href='#FN406' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_7">7&#160;</span> The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower <span class='add'>is</span> servant <a href='#FN407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to the lender.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN408' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: <a href='#FN409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>and the rod of his anger shall fail.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of his bread to the poor.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN412' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea, strife and reproach shall cease.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_11">11&#160;</span> He that loveth pureness of heart, <a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>for</span> the grace of his lips the king <span class='add'>shall be</span> his friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_12">12&#160;</span> The eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth <a href='#FN414' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the words of the transgressor.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN415' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The slothful <span class='add'>man</span> saith, <span class='add'>There is</span> a lion without, I shall be slain in the streets.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN416' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The mouth of strange women <span class='add'>is</span> a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall fall therein.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_15">15&#160;</span> Foolishness <span class='add'>is</span> bound in the heart of a child; <span class='add'>but</span> <a href='#FN417' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_16">16&#160;</span> He that oppresseth the poor to increase his <span class='add'>riches, and</span> he that giveth to the rich, <span class='add'>shall</span> surely <span class='add'>come</span> to want. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_17">17&#160;</span> Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_18">18&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it is</span> a pleasant thing if thou keep them <a href='#FN418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_19">19&#160;</span> That thy trust may be in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I have made known to thee this day, <a href='#FN419' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>even to thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_20">20&#160;</span> Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge,
<span class="verse" id="PR22_21">21&#160;</span> That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth <a href='#FN420' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to them that send unto thee?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_22">22&#160;</span> Rob not the poor, because he <span class='add'>is</span> poor: <a href='#FN421' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>neither oppress the afflicted in the gate:
<span class="verse" id="PR22_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN422' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_24">24&#160;</span> Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou shalt not go:
<span class="verse" id="PR22_25">25&#160;</span> Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN423' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Be not thou <span class='add'>one</span> of them that strike hands, <span class='add'>or</span> of them that are sureties for debts.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_27">27&#160;</span> If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?
<span class="verse" id="PR22_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Remove not the ancient <a href='#FN425' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>landmark, which thy fathers have set.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_29">29&#160;</span> Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before <a href='#FN426' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>mean <span class='add'>men</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_1">1&#160;</span> When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what <span class='add'>is</span> before thee:
<span class="verse" id="PR23_2">2&#160;</span> And put a knife to thy throat, if thou <span class='add'>be</span> a man given to appetite.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_3">3&#160;</span> Be not desirous of his dainties: for they <span class='add'>are</span> deceitful meat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN427' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN428' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for <span class='add'>riches</span> certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_6">6&#160;</span> Eat thou not the bread of <span class='add'>him that hath</span> an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainty meats:
<span class="verse" id="PR23_7">7&#160;</span> For as he thinketh in his heart, so <span class='add'>is</span> he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart <span class='add'>is</span> not with thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_8">8&#160;</span> The morsel <span class='add'>which</span> thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet words.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_9">9&#160;</span> Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom of thy words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Remove not the old <a href='#FN430' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>landmark; and enter not into the fields of the fatherless:
<span class="verse" id="PR23_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN431' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For their redeemer <span class='add'>is</span> mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_12">12&#160;</span> Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN432' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Withhold not correction from the child: for <span class='add'>if</span> thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_15">15&#160;</span> My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, <a href='#FN433' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>even mine.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_16">16&#160;</span> Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN434' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Let not thine heart envy sinners: but <span class='add'>be thou</span> in the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all the day long.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN435' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For surely there is an <a href='#FN436' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>end; and thine expectation shall not be cut off.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_19">19&#160;</span> Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN437' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters <a href='#FN438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of flesh:
<span class="verse" id="PR23_21">21&#160;</span> For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe <span class='add'>a man</span> with rags.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN439' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_23">23&#160;</span> Buy the truth, and sell <span class='add'>it</span> not; <span class='add'>also</span> wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN440' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begetteth a wise <span class='add'>child</span> shall have joy of him.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_25">25&#160;</span> Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_26">26&#160;</span> My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN441' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For a whore <span class='add'>is</span> a deep ditch; and a strange woman <span class='add'>is</span> a narrow pit.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN442' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> She also lieth in wait <a href='#FN443' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as <span class='add'>for</span> a prey, and increaseth the transgressors among men.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN444' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?
<span class="verse" id="PR23_30">30&#160;</span> They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_31">31&#160;</span> Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, <span class='add'>when</span> it moveth itself aright.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_32">32&#160;</span> At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like <a href='#FN445' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>an adder.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_33">33&#160;</span> Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_34">34&#160;</span> Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down <a href='#FN446' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_35">35&#160;</span> They have stricken me, <span class='add'>shalt thou say, and</span> I was not sick; they have beaten me, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN447' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I felt <span class='add'>it</span> not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_1">1&#160;</span> Be not thou <a href='#FN448' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN449' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_3">3&#160;</span> Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is established:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_4">4&#160;</span> And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant riches.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_5">5&#160;</span> A wise man <a href='#FN450' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>is</span> strong; yea, a man of knowledge <a href='#FN451' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>increaseth strength.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN452' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of counsellors <span class='add'>there is</span> safety. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_7">7&#160;</span> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in the gate.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_8">8&#160;</span> He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_9">9&#160;</span> The thought of foolishness <span class='add'>is</span> sin: and the scorner <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to men.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN453' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>small.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN454' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thou forbear to deliver <span class='add'>them that are</span> drawn unto death, and <span class='add'>those that are</span> ready to be slain;
<span class="verse" id="PR24_12">12&#160;</span> If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider <span class='add'>it</span>? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth <span class='add'>not</span> he know <span class='add'>it</span>? and shall <span class='add'>not</span> he render to <span class='add'>every</span> man <a href='#FN455' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>according to his works? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_13">13&#160;</span> My son, eat thou honey, because <span class='add'>it is</span> good; and the honeycomb, <span class='add'>which is</span> sweet <a href='#FN456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to thy taste:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN457' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>So <span class='add'>shall</span> the knowledge of wisdom <span class='add'>be</span> unto thy soul: when thou hast found <span class='add'>it</span>, <a href='#FN458' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_15">15&#160;</span> Lay not wait, O wicked <span class='add'>man</span>, against the dwelling of the righteous; spoil not his resting place:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For a just <span class='add'>man</span> falleth seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into mischief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN460' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_18">18&#160;</span> Lest the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> see <span class='add'>it</span>, and <a href='#FN461' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN462' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN463' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Fret not thyself because of evil <span class='add'>men</span>, neither be thou envious at the wicked;
<span class="verse" id="PR24_20">20&#160;</span> For there shall be no reward to the evil <span class='add'>man;</span> <a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <a href='#FN465' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>candle of the wicked shall be put out.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_21">21&#160;</span> My son, fear thou the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and the king: <span class='add'>and</span> meddle not with <a href='#FN466' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>them that are given to change:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_22">22&#160;</span> For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_23">23&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>things</span> also <span class='add'>belong</span> to the wise. <a href='#FN467' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>It is</span> not good to have respect of persons in judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN468' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that saith unto the wicked, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> righteous; him shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_25">25&#160;</span> But to them that rebuke <span class='add'>him</span> shall be delight, and <a href='#FN469' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a good blessing shall come upon them.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Every man</span> shall kiss <span class='add'>his</span> lips <a href='#FN470' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that giveth a right answer.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_27">27&#160;</span> Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the field; and afterwards build thine house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_28">28&#160;</span> Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and deceive <span class='add'>not</span> with thy lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN471' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will render to the man according to his work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_30">30&#160;</span> I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding;
<span class="verse" id="PR24_31">31&#160;</span> And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, <span class='add'>and</span> nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_32">32&#160;</span> Then I saw, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>considered <span class='add'>it</span> well: I looked upon <span class='add'>it, and</span> received instruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN473' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>Yet</span> a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_34">34&#160;</span> So shall thy poverty come <span class='add'>as</span> one that travelleth; and thy want as <a href='#FN474' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>an armed man.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings <span class='add'>is</span> to search out a matter.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_3">3&#160;</span> The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings <a href='#FN475' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>is</span> unsearchable.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_4">4&#160;</span> Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the finer.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN476' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take away the wicked <span class='add'>from</span> before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN477' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great <span class='add'>men:</span>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN478' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For better <span class='add'>it is</span> that it be said unto thee, Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_8">8&#160;</span> Go not forth hastily to strive, lest <span class='add'>thou know not</span> what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Debate thy cause with thy neighbour <span class='add'>himself;</span> and <a href='#FN480' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>discover not a secret to another:
<span class="verse" id="PR25_10">10&#160;</span> Lest he that heareth <span class='add'>it</span> put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_11">11&#160;</span> A word <a href='#FN481' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fitly spoken <span class='add'>is like</span> apples of gold in pictures of silver.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, <span class='add'>so is</span> a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN482' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, <span class='add'>so is</span> a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his masters.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_14">14&#160;</span> Whoso boasteth himself <a href='#FN483' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of a false gift <span class='add'>is like</span> clouds and wind without rain.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN484' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_16">16&#160;</span> Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN485' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour’s house; lest he be <a href='#FN486' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>weary of thee, and <span class='add'>so</span> hate thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN487' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour <span class='add'>is</span> a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_19">19&#160;</span> Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble <span class='add'>is like</span> a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, <span class='add'>and as</span> vinegar upon nitre, so <span class='add'>is</span> he that singeth songs to an heavy heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN488' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink:
<span class="verse" id="PR25_22">22&#160;</span> For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall reward thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN489' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The north wind driveth away rain: so <span class='add'>doth</span> an angry countenance a backbiting tongue.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN490' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman and in a wide house.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> cold waters to a thirsty soul, so <span class='add'>is</span> good news from a far country.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_26">26&#160;</span> A righteous man falling down before the wicked <span class='add'>is as</span> a troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> not good to eat much honey: so <span class='add'>for men</span> to search their own glory <span class='add'>is not</span> glory.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN491' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that <span class='add'>hath</span> no rule over his own spirit <span class='add'>is like</span> a city <span class='add'>that is</span> broken down, <span class='add'>and</span> without walls.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_1">1&#160;</span> As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not seemly for a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_2">2&#160;</span> As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_3">3&#160;</span> A <a href='#FN492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fool’s back. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_4">4&#160;</span> Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_5">5&#160;</span> Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in <a href='#FN493' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his own conceit.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_6">6&#160;</span> He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the feet, <span class='add'>and</span> drinketh <a href='#FN494' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>damage.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_7">7&#160;</span> The legs of the lame <a href='#FN495' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>are not equal: so <span class='add'>is</span> a parable in the mouth of fools.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN496' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so <span class='add'>is</span> he that giveth honour to a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so <span class='add'>is</span> a parable in the mouth of fools.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN497' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> The great <span class='add'>God</span> that formed all <span class='add'>things</span> both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN498' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> As a dog returneth to his vomit, <span class='add'>so</span> a fool <a href='#FN499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>returneth to his folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_12">12&#160;</span> Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? <span class='add'>there is</span> more hope of a fool than of him.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The slothful <span class='add'>man</span> saith, <span class='add'>There is</span> a lion in the way; a lion <span class='add'>is</span> in the streets.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the door turneth upon his hinges, so <span class='add'>doth</span> the slothful upon his bed.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN501' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The slothful hideth his hand in <span class='add'>his</span> bosom; <a href='#FN502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_16">16&#160;</span> The sluggard <span class='add'>is</span> wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can render a reason.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_17">17&#160;</span> He that passeth by, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN503' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>meddleth with strife <span class='add'>belonging</span> not to him, <span class='add'>is like</span> one that taketh a dog by the ears.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_18">18&#160;</span> As a mad <span class='add'>man</span> who casteth <a href='#FN504' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>firebrands, arrows, and death,
<span class="verse" id="PR26_19">19&#160;</span>So <span class='add'>is</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN505' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Where no wood is, <span class='add'>there</span> the fire goeth out: so <a href='#FN506' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>where <span class='add'>there is</span> no <a href='#FN507' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>talebearer, the strife <a href='#FN508' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>ceaseth.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN509' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>As</span> coals <span class='add'>are</span> to burning coals, and wood to fire; so <span class='add'>is</span> a contentious man to kindle strife.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN510' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The words of a talebearer <span class='add'>are</span> as wounds, and they go down into the <a href='#FN511' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>innermost parts of the belly.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_23">23&#160;</span> Burning lips and a wicked heart <span class='add'>are like</span> a potsherd covered with silver dross. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_24">24&#160;</span> He that hateth <a href='#FN512' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit within him;
<span class="verse" id="PR26_25">25&#160;</span> When he <a href='#FN513' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>speaketh fair, believe him not: for <span class='add'>there are</span> seven abominations in his heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Whose</span> <a href='#FN514' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be shewed before the <span class='add'>whole</span> congregation.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN515' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_28">28&#160;</span> A lying tongue hateth <span class='add'>those that are</span> afflicted by it; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN516' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Boast not thyself of <a href='#FN517' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_2">2&#160;</span> Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_3">3&#160;</span> A stone <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN518' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool’s wrath <span class='add'>is</span> heavier than them both.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN519' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Wrath <span class='add'>is</span> cruel, and anger <span class='add'>is</span> outrageous; but who <span class='add'>is</span> able to stand before <a href='#FN520' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>envy?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_5">5&#160;</span> Open rebuke <span class='add'>is</span> better than secret love.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN521' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Faithful <span class='add'>are</span> the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN522' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>deceitful.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_7">7&#160;</span> The full soul <a href='#FN523' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>loatheth an honeycomb; but <a href='#FN524' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_8">8&#160;</span> As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so <span class='add'>is</span> a man that wandereth from his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_9">9&#160;</span> Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so <span class='add'>doth</span> the sweetness of a man’s friend <a href='#FN525' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by hearty counsel.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_10">10&#160;</span> Thine own friend, and thy father’s friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother’s house in the day of thy calamity: <span class='add'>for</span> <a href='#FN526' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>better <span class='add'>is</span> a neighbour <span class='add'>that is</span> near than a brother far off.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN527' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN528' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A prudent <span class='add'>man</span> foreseeth the evil, <span class='add'>and</span> hideth himself; <span class='add'>but</span> the simple pass on, <span class='add'>and</span> are punished.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN529' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_14">14&#160;</span> He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN530' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_16">16&#160;</span> Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his right hand, <span class='add'>which</span> bewrayeth <span class='add'>itself</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_17">17&#160;</span> Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_18">18&#160;</span> Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that waiteth on his master shall be honoured.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_19">19&#160;</span> As in water face <span class='add'>answereth</span> to face, so the heart of man to man.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_20">20&#160;</span> Hell and destruction are <a href='#FN531' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>never full; so <a href='#FN532' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the eyes of man are never satisfied.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN533' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>As</span> the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so <span class='add'>is</span> a man to his praise.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_22">22&#160;</span> Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, <span class='add'>yet</span> will not his foolishness depart from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_23">23&#160;</span> Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN534' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>look well to thy herds.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_24">24&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN535' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>riches <span class='add'>are</span> not for ever: and doth the crown <span class='add'>endure</span> <a href='#FN536' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to every generation?
<span class="verse" id="PR27_25">25&#160;</span> The hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_26">26&#160;</span> The lambs <span class='add'>are</span> for thy clothing, and the goats <span class='add'>are</span> the price of <a href='#FN537' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the field.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_27">27&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>thou shalt have</span> goats’ milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy household, and <span class='add'>for</span> the <a href='#FN538' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>maintenance for thy maidens.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_1">1&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN539' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_2">2&#160;</span> For the transgression of a land many <span class='add'>are</span> the princes thereof: but <a href='#FN540' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by a man of understanding <span class='add'>and</span> knowledge the state <span class='add'>thereof</span> shall be prolonged.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_3">3&#160;</span> A poor man that oppresseth the poor <span class='add'>is like</span> a sweeping rain <a href='#FN541' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which leaveth no food.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_4">4&#160;</span> They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the law contend with them.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_5">5&#160;</span> Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> understand all <span class='add'>things</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN542' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Better <span class='add'>is</span> the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse <span class='add'>in his</span> ways, though he <span class='add'>be</span> rich.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN543' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso keepeth the law <span class='add'>is</span> a wise son: but he that <a href='#FN544' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>is a companion of riotous <span class='add'>men</span> shameth his father.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN545' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that by usury and <a href='#FN546' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_9">9&#160;</span> He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer <span class='add'>shall be</span> abomination.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN547' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good <span class='add'>things</span> in possession.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_11">11&#160;</span> The rich man <span class='add'>is</span> wise <a href='#FN548' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>in his own conceit; but the poor that hath understanding searcheth him out.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN549' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When righteous <span class='add'>men</span> do rejoice, <span class='add'>there is</span> great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man is <a href='#FN550' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>hidden.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN551' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh <span class='add'>them</span> shall have mercy.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_14">14&#160;</span> Happy <span class='add'>is</span> the man that feareth alway: <a href='#FN552' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; <span class='add'>so is</span> a wicked ruler over the poor people.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_16">16&#160;</span> The prince that wanteth understanding <span class='add'>is</span> also a great oppressor: <span class='add'>but</span> he that hateth covetousness shall prolong <span class='add'>his</span> days.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN553' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man that doeth violence to the blood of <span class='add'>any</span> person shall <a href='#FN554' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>flee to the pit; let no man stay him.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN555' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse <span class='add'>in his</span> ways shall fall at once.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN556' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that followeth after vain <span class='add'>persons</span> shall have poverty enough.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_20">20&#160;</span> A faithful man shall abound with blessings: <a href='#FN557' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be <a href='#FN558' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>innocent.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN559' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> To have respect of persons <span class='add'>is</span> not good: for for a piece of bread <span class='add'>that</span> man will transgress.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN560' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> He that hasteth to be rich <span class='add'>hath</span> an evil eye, and considereth not that poverty shall come upon him.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN561' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_24">24&#160;</span> Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, <span class='add'>It is</span> no transgression; the same <span class='add'>is</span> the companion of <a href='#FN562' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a destroyer.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN563' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that putteth his trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be made fat.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_26">26&#160;</span> He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN564' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN565' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the righteous increase.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN566' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He, that being often reproved hardeneth <span class='add'>his</span> neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN567' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When the righteous are <a href='#FN568' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN569' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: <a href='#FN570' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth <span class='add'>his</span> substance.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_4">4&#160;</span> The king by judgment establisheth the land: but <a href='#FN571' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_5">5&#160;</span> A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_6">6&#160;</span> In the transgression of an evil man <span class='add'>there is</span> a snare: but the righteous doth sing and rejoice.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN572' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The righteous considereth the cause of the poor: <span class='add'>but</span> the wicked regardeth not to know <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_8">8&#160;</span> Scornful men <a href='#FN573' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bring a city into a snare: but wise <span class='add'>men</span> turn away wrath.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or laugh, <span class='add'>there is</span> no rest.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN574' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_11">11&#160;</span> A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise <span class='add'>man</span> keepeth it in till afterwards.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_12">12&#160;</span> If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants <span class='add'>are</span> wicked.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN575' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The poor and <a href='#FN576' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the deceitful man meet together: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> lighteneth both their eyes.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN577' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for ever.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN578' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The rod and reproof give wisdom: but <a href='#FN579' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a child left <span class='add'>to himself</span> bringeth his mother to shame.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_16">16&#160;</span> When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth: <a href='#FN580' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>but the righteous shall see their fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN581' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_18">18&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>there is</span> no vision, the people <a href='#FN582' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_19">19&#160;</span> A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand he will not answer.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_20">20&#160;</span> Seest thou a man <span class='add'>that is</span> hasty <a href='#FN583' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in his words? <span class='add'>there is</span> more hope of a fool than of him.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_21">21&#160;</span> He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall have him become <span class='add'>his</span> son at the length.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN584' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in transgression.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN585' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> A man’s pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the humble in spirit.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_24">24&#160;</span> Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth cursing, and bewrayeth <span class='add'>it</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_25">25&#160;</span> The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <a href='#FN586' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shall be safe.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN587' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Many seek <a href='#FN588' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the ruler’s favour; but <span class='add'>every</span> man’s judgment <span class='add'>cometh</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_27">27&#160;</span> An unjust man <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the just: and <span class='add'>he that is</span> upright in the way <span class='add'>is</span> abomination to the wicked.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_1">1&#160;</span> The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, <span class='add'>even</span> the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal,
<span class="verse" id="PR30_2">2&#160;</span>Surely I <span class='add'>am</span> more brutish than <span class='add'>any</span> man, and have not the understanding of a man.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_3">3&#160;</span> I neither learned wisdom, nor <a href='#FN589' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>have the knowledge of the holy.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN590' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? <a href='#FN591' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what <span class='add'>is</span> his name, and what <span class='add'>is</span> his son’s name, if thou canst tell?
<span class="verse" id="PR30_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN592' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Every word of God <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN593' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pure: he <span class='add'>is</span> a shield unto them that put their trust in him.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN594' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_7">7&#160;</span> Two <span class='add'>things</span> have I required of thee; <a href='#FN595' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deny me <span class='add'>them</span> not before I die:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_8">8&#160;</span> Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; <a href='#FN596' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>feed me with food <a href='#FN597' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>convenient for me:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN598' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Lest I be full, and <a href='#FN599' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deny <span class='add'>thee</span>, and say, Who <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God <span class='add'>in vain</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN600' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation <span class='add'>that</span> curseth their father, and doth not bless their mother.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation <span class='add'>that are</span> pure in their own eyes, and <span class='add'>yet</span> is not washed from their filthiness.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation, O how <a href='#FN601' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN602' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation, whose teeth <span class='add'>are as</span> swords, and their jaw teeth <span class='add'>as</span> knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from <span class='add'>among</span> men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_15">15&#160;</span> The horseleach hath two daughters, <span class='add'>crying</span>, Give, give. There are three <span class='add'>things that</span> are never satisfied, <span class='add'>yea</span>, four <span class='add'>things</span> say not, <a href='#FN603' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='add'>It is</span> enough:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_16">16&#160;</span> The grave; and the barren womb; the earth <span class='add'>that</span> is not filled with water; and the fire <span class='add'>that</span> saith not, <span class='add'>It is</span> enough.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_17">17&#160;</span> The eye <span class='add'>that</span> mocketh at <span class='add'>his</span> father, and despiseth to obey <span class='add'>his</span> mother, the ravens of <a href='#FN604' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_18">18&#160;</span> There be three <span class='add'>things which</span> are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_19">19&#160;</span> The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the <a href='#FN605' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_20">20&#160;</span>Such <span class='add'>is</span> the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_21">21&#160;</span> For three <span class='add'>things</span> the earth is disquieted, and for four <span class='add'>which</span> it cannot bear:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN606' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he is filled with meat;
<span class="verse" id="PR30_23">23&#160;</span> For an odious <span class='add'>woman</span> when she is married; and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_24">24&#160;</span> There be four <span class='add'>things which are</span> little upon the earth, but they <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN607' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>exceeding wise:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN608' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The ants <span class='add'>are</span> a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer;
<span class="verse" id="PR30_26">26&#160;</span> The conies <span class='add'>are but</span> a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks;
<span class="verse" id="PR30_27">27&#160;</span> The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them <a href='#FN609' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by bands;
<span class="verse" id="PR30_28">28&#160;</span> The spider taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings’ palaces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_29">29&#160;</span> There be three <span class='add'>things</span> which go well, yea, four are comely in going:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_30">30&#160;</span> A lion <span class='add'>which is</span> strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for any;
<span class="verse" id="PR30_31">31&#160;</span> A <a href='#FN610' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN611' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against whom <span class='add'>there is</span> no rising up.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_32">32&#160;</span> If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, <a href='#FN612' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>lay</span> thine hand upon thy mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_33">33&#160;</span> Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_1">1&#160;</span> The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_2">2&#160;</span> What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows?
<span class="verse" id="PR31_3">3&#160;</span> Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> not for kings, O Lemuel, <span class='add'>it is</span> not for kings to drink wine; nor for princes strong drink:
<span class="verse" id="PR31_5">5&#160;</span> Lest they drink, and forget the law, and <a href='#FN613' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pervert the judgment <a href='#FN614' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of any of the afflicted.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN615' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be <a href='#FN616' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of heavy hearts.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_7">7&#160;</span> Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_8">8&#160;</span> Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all <a href='#FN617' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>such as are appointed to destruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_9">9&#160;</span> Open thy mouth, <a href='#FN618' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN619' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price <span class='add'>is</span> far above rubies.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_11">11&#160;</span> The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_12">12&#160;</span> She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_13">13&#160;</span> She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_14">14&#160;</span> She is like the merchants’ ships; she bringeth her food from afar.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_15">15&#160;</span> She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_16">16&#160;</span> She considereth a field, and <a href='#FN620' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_17">17&#160;</span> She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN621' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> She perceiveth that her merchandise <span class='add'>is</span> good: her candle goeth not out by night.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_19">19&#160;</span> She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN622' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_21">21&#160;</span> She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her household <span class='add'>are</span> clothed with <a href='#FN623' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>scarlet.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_22">22&#160;</span> She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing <span class='add'>is</span> silk and purple.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_23">23&#160;</span> Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_24">24&#160;</span> She maketh fine linen, and selleth <span class='add'>it;</span> and delivereth girdles unto the merchant.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_25">25&#160;</span> Strength and honour <span class='add'>are</span> her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_26">26&#160;</span> She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue <span class='add'>is</span> the law of kindness.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_27">27&#160;</span> She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_28">28&#160;</span> Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband <span class='add'>also</span>, and he praiseth her.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_29">29&#160;</span> Many daughters <a href='#FN624' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_30">30&#160;</span> Favour <span class='add'>is</span> deceitful, and beauty <span class='add'>is</span> vain: <span class='add'>but</span> a woman <span class='add'>that</span> feareth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, she shall be praised.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_31">31&#160;</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in the gates. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. equities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, advisement.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, an eloquent speech.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_28'>28. 28</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS111_10'>111. 10</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_10'>9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the principal part.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an adding</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_7'>59. 7</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_15'>8. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the eyes of every thing that hath a wing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Wisdoms, that is, excellent wisdom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_12'>65. 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_4'>66. 4</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_13'>7. 13</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK8_18'>8. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_9'>27. 9</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_15'>1. 15</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_11'>11. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_12'>14. 12</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC3_4'>3. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ease of the simple.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. givest thy voice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_44'>13. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_5'>1. 5</a>. 1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_3'>5. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_5'>7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_29'>37. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_17'>18. 17</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_35'>104. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, plucked up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_1'>8. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_16'>30. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. years of life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_9'>13. 9</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_8'>6. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS111_10'>111. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, good success.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R128_9'>28 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_16'>12. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. medicine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb watering, or, moistening.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_19'>23 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_26'>34 26</a> Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT26_2'>26. 2</a>, &amp;c. Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_10'>3. 10</a>, &amp;c. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_13'>14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_8'>28. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_17'>5. 17</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_5'>12. 5</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_19'>3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the man that draweth out understanding</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_15'>28 15</a>, &amp;c. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_10'>19 10</a>. ch. 8 <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_11'>11</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_19'>19</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prepared.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_24'>37. 24</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_11'>91. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the owners thereof.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Practise no evil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_1'>37. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of violence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_14'>25. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML2_2'>2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.34</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_6'>4. 6</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_5'>5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR3_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. exalteth the fools.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_1'>29 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Chr. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R128_9'>28 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_9'>1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, she shall compass thee with a crown of glory.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_11'>91. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_1'>1. 1</a>. ch. 1. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_10'>10</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. medicine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. above all keeping.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. frowardness of mouth, and perverseness of lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, all thy ways shall be ordered aright.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR4_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_32'>5. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_16'>2 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_24'>6 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch.<a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_27'>7.27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thy strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. water thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. err thou always in her love.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_4'>31. 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_21'>34. 21</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_3'>15. 3</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_17'>16. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_19'>32. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, so shalt thou prevail with thy friend.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_33'>24. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_4'>13. 4</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_4'>20. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. casteth forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of his soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Haughty eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_15'>3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.19</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 him]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_8'>19. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_105'>119. 105</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, candle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_16'>2. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_3'>5. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_5'>7. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of the strange tongue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_28'>5. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the woman of a man, or, a man's wife.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR6_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. He will not accept the face of any ransom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_8'>6. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_18'>11. 18</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_3'>8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_3'>5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the sons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the evening of the day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_13'>9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. she strengthened her face, and said.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Peace offerings are upon me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the new moon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_21"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits her]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. suddenly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_18'>2. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_5'>5 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_20'>1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the abomination of my lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wreathed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_15'>28. 15</a>. Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_10'>19 10</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_15'>3. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_16'>16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, subtilty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_16'>3. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_14'>3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, walk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, open places.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the chief part.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a circle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. 1. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_9'>9</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_10'>10</a>. Job 38. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_10'>10</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_11'>11</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_9'>104. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 119. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_1'>1</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_2'>2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS128_1'>128 1</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_28'>11. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR8_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bring forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb her killing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_6'>7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_28'>28. 28</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS111_10'>111. 10</a>. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_27'>10. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_11'>7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of secrecies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_20'>15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_4'>11. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_25'>37. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the wicked for their wickedness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_24'>12. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_11'>11.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_6'>112. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a fool of lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall be beaten.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS23_4'>23. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_13'>6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall be beaten.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_14'>13. 14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C113_4'>13. 4</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_8'>4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heart</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_11'>18. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, causeth to err.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_9'>14 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 a sport]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_11'>9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. addeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_13'>8. 13</a> &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB11_20'>11. 20</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_10'>112. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_22'>37. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS125_1'>125. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR10_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. frowardnesses.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_36'>19. 36</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_15'>25. 15</a>. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_11'>16. 11</a>. &amp;c 20. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_10'>10</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Balances of deceit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a perfect stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_33'>15. 33</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_18'>16 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_12'>18. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_6'>13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_2'>10. 2</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK7_19'>7. 19</a>. Zeph. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP1_18'>1. 18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. rectify.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_22'>5 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_18'>21. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_13'>8. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. destitute of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. He that walketh, being a talebearer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_1'>12 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall be sore broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. those that strike hands.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. departeth from.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_9'>9. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The soul of blessing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 7. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_15'>15</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_16'>16</a>. &amp;c 9. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_15'>15</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_16'>16</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS10_2'>10. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS57_6'>57. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_3'>1. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS92_12'>92. 12</a>, &amp;c. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_8'>17. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. taketh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_18'>4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_25'>10. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_7'>11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 1. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_11'>11</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_37'>37. 37</a> ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_21'>11. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. perverse of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bowels.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_19'>28. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the fortress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The snare of the wicked is in the transgression of lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_7'>18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_2'>13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_7'>3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in that day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_5'>14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS57_4'>57. 4</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS59_7'>59. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_16'>13. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_2'>15 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_4'>10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, deceitful.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_13'>15. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR12_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, abundant.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_14'>12. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 11. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_3'>3</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_5'>5</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_6'>18. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_17'>21. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, candle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_2'>10.2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_21'>20. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall be in peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_27'>14. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_23'>12. 23</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_2'>15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spreadeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall be broken.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_17'>27. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_13'>23. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR13_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_10'>34. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_3'>37. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_4'>12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_16'>20. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_1'>23. 1</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_19'>6. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_17'>12. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_9'>8. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_23'>10. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the bitterness of his soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_25'>16. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_31'>1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_7'>19. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. many are the lovers of the rich.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_9'>112. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_5'>5.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. short of spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.31</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_5'>17. 5</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_40'>25. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR14_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb to nations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_15'>25. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_23'>12. 23</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_16'>13. 16</a>. ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_28'>28.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. belcheth, or, bubbleth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_21'>34. 21</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_21'>5. 21</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_17'>16. 17</a> &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_19'>32. 19</a>. Heb. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_13'>4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The healing of the tongue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10.1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_27'>21. 27</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_11'>1. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_3'>66. 3</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_20'>6. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_22'>7. 22</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_22'>5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Instruction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB26_6'>26. 6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_22'>17 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_16'>37. 16</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_8'>16 8</a> 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_6'>6 6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_1'>17 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_21'>26. 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_22'>29. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is raised up as a causey</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_23'>10. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. void of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_14'>11. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his season.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Phil. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_20'>3. 20</a>. Col 3. <a href='COL.xhtml#CL3_1'>1</a>, <a href='COL.xhtml#CL3_2'>2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_7'>12 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_11'>14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_18'>6. 18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. words of pleasantness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_16'>34. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_18'>145 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, correction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, obeyeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. possesseth an heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.33</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_12'>18. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_9'>9.</a> 19. 21. &amp;c 20 24. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_23'>10. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, disposings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_2'>21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_5'>37. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS55_23'>55. 23</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_25'>6. 25</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_22'>12. 22</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_7'>5. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Roll.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_30'>21. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_17'>6 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_13'>8. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. held innocent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_16'>37. 16</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_16'>15 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_1'>1.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Divination</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_36'>19. 36</a>. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_1'>11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. all the stones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_12'>19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_11'>8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_2'>11 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_12'>18. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He that understandeth a matter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_12'>2 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_8'>34 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS125_1'>125 1</a>. Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_18'>30 18</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_7'>17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb maketh wise</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_12'>14. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The soul of him that laboureth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb boweth unto him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A man of Belial</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 6. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_14'>14</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_19'>19</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_18'>15. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_21'>26 21</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_22'>29. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR16_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sendeth forth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_17'>15. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, good cheer</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS26_2'>26. 2</a> ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_21'>27 21</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_10'>17. 10</a>. Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_31'>14. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. held innocent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS127_3'>127. 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS128_3'>128. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A lip of excellency.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a lip of lying.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_16'>18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stone of grace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_12'>10. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, procureth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, A reproof aweth more a wise man, than to strike a fool an hundred times</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_17'>12 17</a>. 1 Thess. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_15'>5 15</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_7'>23. 7</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_24'>24. 24</a>. Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_23'>5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_24'>18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_1'>6. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_15'>11. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. The froward of heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_25'>12. 25</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_13'>15. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to a medicine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_14'>2. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC8_1'>8. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_20'>15. 20</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_13'>19. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.27</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_19'>1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 17.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a cool spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR17_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB13_5'>13. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, He that separateth himself seeketh according to his desire, and intermeddleth in every business.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_5'>20.5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_15'>19. 15</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_17'>1. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_19'>16. 19</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_23'>24.23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_14'>10. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_13'>12. 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_3'>13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_18'>12. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_22'>26. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, whisperer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, like as when men are wounded</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. chambers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_2'>18. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS27_1'>27. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS144_2'>144. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is set aloft.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_15'>10. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch.<a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_2'>11.2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_33'>15 33</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_18'>16 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb returneth a word.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch.<a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_8'>17.8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_14'>12. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_2'>13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_14'>19. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.23</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM2_3'>2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR18_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_17'>17. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch.<a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_6'>28.6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_20'>14. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex.<a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_1'>23.1</a> Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_16'>19. 16</a>. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_19'>6 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_28'>21. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. held innocent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of gifts</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_20'>14. 20</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_5'>5.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_22'>30. 22</a> Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_6'>10 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_29'>14. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, prudence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_15'>16. 15</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_2'>20 2</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_15'>28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10 1</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_20'>15. 20</a> &amp;c 17. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_21'>21</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_9'>21 9</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_15'>27 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_22'>18. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_4'>10.4</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_13'>20. 13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_28'>11 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_42'>10. 42</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_40'>25. 40</a>. 2 Cor. 9. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_6'>6</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, his deed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_24'>13. 24</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_13'>23. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to his destruction or, to cause him to die.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. add.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB23_13'>23. 13</a> Ps. 33. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_10'>10</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_11'>11</a>. ch. 16. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_1'>1</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_9'>9</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_10'>46 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_19'>15. 19</a> &amp;c 26. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_13'>13</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_11'>21. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. will be cunning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR19_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A witness of Belial.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_14'>16. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_12'>19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_4'>10.4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, winter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_4'>18.4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bounty.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_2'>112. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.9</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_46'>8 46</a>. 2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_36'>6. 36</a>. Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_4'>14. 4</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS51_5'>51. 5</a> Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_20'>7. 20</a>. 1 John <a href='1JN.xhtml#J11_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_13'>25, 13</a>,&amp;c. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_1'>11. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_11'>16. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A stone and a stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an ephah and an ephah.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_11'>4. 11</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS94_9'>94. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_11'>12. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_15'>19. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_13'>27. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_17'>9 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Bread of lying. or, falsehood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_22'>15. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_13'>11. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, enticeth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_17'>21 17</a>. Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_9'>20 9</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_4'>15 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, candle.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_35'>32. 35</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_13'>17. 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_29'>24 29</a> Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_17'>12. 17</a>. 1 Thess. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_15'>5. 15</a>. 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_10'>10.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. balances of deceit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_23'>37. 23</a> ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_9'>16. 9</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_23'>10. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS101_5'>101. 5</a>, &amp;c. ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_8'>8.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 20.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lamp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS101_1'>101. 1</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_14'>29 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_31'>16. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR20_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is a purging medicine against evil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_2'>16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.3</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_22'>15. 22</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_8'>15. 8</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_11'>1. 11</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_6'>6. 6</a>. Mic. 6. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_7'>7</a>, <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC6_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_17'>6. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Haughtiness of eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the light of the wicked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_2'>10. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_11'>13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. saw them, or, dwell with them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_13'>19. 13</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_24'>25. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_15'>27. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a woman of contentions.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. an house of society.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_5'>4. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is not favoured.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_25'>19. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_30'>18. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_8'>17. 8</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_16'>18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sport.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_8'>11 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_9'>9.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the land of the desert.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_14'>9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_13'>12. 13</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_21'>18 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the wrath of pride.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_4'>13. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_9'>112. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_9'>50 9</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_8'>15 8</a>. Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_3'>66. 3</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_20'>6 20</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_22'>5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in wickedness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 19. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_5'>5</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A witness of lies.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, considereth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR9_23'>9. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_17'>33. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS3_8'>3 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR21_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 21.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, victory</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, favour is better than, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_13'>29. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_12'>27. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_3'>112 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The reward of humility, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Catechise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his way.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to the man that lendeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_8'>4. 8</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS10_13'>10. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and with the rod of his anger he shall be consumed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.9</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_6'>9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Good of eye.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS101_5'>101. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and hath grace in his lips.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the matters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_13'>26. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_16'>2 16</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_3'>5 3</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_5'>7. 5</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_27'>23 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_24'>13. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_18'>19. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_13'>23 13</a>. &amp;c 29. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_15'>15</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_17'>17</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in thy belly</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, trust thou also.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, to those that send thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Zech <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC7_10'>7. 10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_14'>31. 14</a> ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_11'>23. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_1'>6 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_15'>11 15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_14'>19. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_17'>27. 17</a>. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_10'>23. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 22.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bound.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR22_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. obscure men.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Tim. 6. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_9'>9</a>, <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Wilt thou cause thine eyes to fly upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_14'>19. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT27_17'>27. 17</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_28'>22. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bound.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_21'>31. 21</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_23'>22 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_24'>13. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_18'>19. 18</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_15'>23. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, even I will rejoice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_1'>37 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_3'>73. 3</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_31'>3. 31</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_1'>24. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_14'>24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, reward.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_13'>13 13</a>. Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_18'>5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb of their flesh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_20'>15 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.27</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_14'>22. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_12'>7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as a robber.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_11'>5. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 23.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a cockatrice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in the heart of the sea.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_35"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23.35</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I knew it not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_1'>37 1</a>, &amp;c. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS73_3'>73. 3</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_17'>23. 17</a>. ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_19'>19.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS10_7'>10. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is in strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. strengtheneth might.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_14'>11. 14</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_22'>15. 22</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_18'>20. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. narrow.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS82_4'>82. 4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_11'>34. 11</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>62 12</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_19'>32. 19</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_6'>2. 6</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb uponthy palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_10'>19. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_103'>119. 103</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_18'>23. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_19'>5. 19</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_19'>34. 19</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_24'>37. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_29'>31. 29</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS35_15'>35 15</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_5'>17. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. it be evil in his eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_1'>37 1</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_17'>23. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Keep not company with the wicked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_17'>21. 17</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_9'>13. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 24.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lamp.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. changers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_15'>19. 15</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_17'>1. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT16_19'>16 19</a>. ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_5'>18. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_21'>28. 21</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_24'>7. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_15'>17. 15</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_23'>5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a blessing of good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. that answereth right words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.29</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_22'>20. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. set my heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.33</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_9'>6. 9</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR24_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of shield.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. there is no searching.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_8'>20. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Set not out thy glory</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_10'>14. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_25'>5 25</a>. &amp;c <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_15'>18. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, discover not the secret of another.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. spoken upon his wheels.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_17'>13. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in a gift of falsehood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_4'>32. 4</a>, &amp;c. 1 Sam. <a href='1SA.xhtml#S125_24'>25 24</a>, &amp;c. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_1'>15. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_14'>16. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Let thy foot be seldom in thy neighbour's house.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. full of thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS120_4'>120. 4</a> ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_18'>12. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_4'>23. 4</a>. Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_20'>12. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 25.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, The north wind bringeth forth rain so doth a backbiting tongue an angry countenance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_13'>19. 13</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_9'>21. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR25_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_32'>16. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS32_9'>32. 9</a>. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_13'>10 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. his own eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, violence.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. are lifted up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, As he that putteth a precious stone in an heap of stones.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, A great man grieveth all, and he hireth the fool, he hireth also transgressors.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Pet. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_22'>2. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. iterateth his folly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_13'>22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_24'>19. 24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, he is weary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, is enraged.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. flames, or, sparks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Without wood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_10'>22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, whisperor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. is silent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_18'>15. 18</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_22'>29 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_8'>18. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. chambers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, is known.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. maketh his voice gracious.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_26"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 26.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hatred is covered in secret.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR26_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. 7. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_15'>15</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_16'>16</a> &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_15'>9. 15</a>. Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_8'>10 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">James <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_13'>4. 13</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to morrow day.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heaviness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Wrath is cruelty, and anger an overflowing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, jealousy?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS141_5'>141. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 27.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, earnest, or, frequent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. treadeth under foot.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB6_7'>6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. from the counsel of the soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_17'>17. 17</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_24'>18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.11</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10. 1</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_24'>23. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_3'>22. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_16'>20. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_13'>19. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_8'>1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_3'>17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. set thy heart</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb strength.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb to generation and generation?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_26"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27.26</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 thy]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. life.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_36'>26. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, by men of understanding and wisdom shall they likewise be prolonged.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. without food.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_1'>19. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_3'>29. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, feedeth gluttons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_22'>13. 22</a>. Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_26'>2. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by increase.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_27'>26. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. in his eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_10'>11. 10</a>. ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_28'>28.</a> 10. 6.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sought for.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS32_5'>32. 5</a>. 1 John 1. <a href='1JN.xhtml#J11_9'>9</a>, <a href='1JN.xhtml#J11_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Rom. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_20'>11. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_6'>9. 6</a>. Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_14'>21. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 fly]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_25'>10. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.19</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_11'>12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_11'>13. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_4'>23. 4</a>. 1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_9'>6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, unpunished.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_5'>18. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_23'>24. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 28.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_20'>20.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.23</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_6'>27. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man destroying.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_10'>13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_7'>15 7</a>, &amp;c. ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_9'>22. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR28_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.28</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_12'>12.</a> 29. 2.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. A man of reproofs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_10'>11. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_28'>28. 28</a>. Eccles. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_5'>10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, increased.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10. 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_20'>15. 20</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_11'>27. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_9'>5. 9</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_7'>28. 7</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK15_13'>15. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a man of oblations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_16'>29. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, set a city on fire.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Men of blood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_2'>22 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the usurer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_28'>20. 28</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_17'>17.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>10 1</a>. &amp;c 17. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_21'>21</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_36'>37. 36</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS58_10'>58. 10</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_8'>91 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_24'>13. 24</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_15'>22 15</a>. &amp;c 23. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_13'>13</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, is made naked.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 29.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in his matters?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_18'>15 18</a> &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_21'>26. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_29'>22 29</a> ch <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_33'>15 33</a>. &amp;c <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_12'>18 12</a>. Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_12'>23. 12</a> Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_11'>14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shall be set on high</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_6'>19 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR29_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the face of a ruler.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. know.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.4</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_13'>3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_4'>38. 4</a>. Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_3'>104. 3</a>. Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_12'>40. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS12_6'>12 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_30'>18 30</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_8'>19. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_140'>119 140</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. purified.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_2'>4. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_32'>12 32</a>. Rev. 22. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_18'>18</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. withhold not from me</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_11'>6. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of my allowance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_15'>32 15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. belie thee.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Hurt not with thy tongue.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.13</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_17'>6. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_17'>29. 17</a>. Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS52_2'>52. 2</a>. &amp;c <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS57_4'>57. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Wealth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the brook.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_10'>19. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. wise, made wise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_6'>6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. gathered together.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 30.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, horse.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. girt in the loins</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Job <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_5'>21. 5</a> &amp;c <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB40_4'>40. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. alter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of all the sons of affliction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_15'>104. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bitter of soul.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the sons of destruction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_15'>19. 15</a>. Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_16'>1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_4'>12. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. taketh.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. She tasteth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 31.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. She spreadeth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, double garments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_29"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 31.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, have gotten riches.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
