<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Romans 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Romans</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM16_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='RM0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO THE ROMANS  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="RM1_1">1&#160;</span> Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called <span class='add'>to be</span> an apostle, <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>separated unto the gospel of God,
<span class="verse" id="RM1_2">2&#160;</span>(Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,)
<span class="verse" id="RM1_3">3&#160;</span> Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh;
<span class="verse" id="RM1_4">4&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>declared <span class='add'>to be</span> the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_5">5&#160;</span> By whom we have received grace and apostleship, <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for obedience to the faith among all nations, for his name:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_6">6&#160;</span> Among whom are ye also the called of Jesus Christ:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_7">7&#160;</span> To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called <span class='add'>to be</span> saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM1_8">8&#160;</span> First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_9">9&#160;</span> For God is my witness, whom I serve <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers;
<span class="verse" id="RM1_10">10&#160;</span> Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come unto you.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_11">11&#160;</span> For I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established;
<span class="verse" id="RM1_12">12&#160;</span> That is, that I may be comforted together <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with you by the mutual faith both of you and me.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_13">13&#160;</span> Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto,) that I might have some fruit <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>among you also, even as among other Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_14">14&#160;</span> I am debtor both to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_15">15&#160;</span> So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_16">16&#160;</span> For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_17">17&#160;</span> For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The just shall live by faith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM1_18">18&#160;</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness;
<span class="verse" id="RM1_19">19&#160;</span> Because that which may be known of God is manifest <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in them; for God hath shewed <span class='add'>it</span> unto them.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_20">20&#160;</span> For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, <span class='add'>even</span> his eternal power and Godhead; <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>so that they are without excuse:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_21">21&#160;</span> Because that, when they knew God, they glorified <span class='add'>him</span> not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_22">22&#160;</span> Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools,
<span class="verse" id="RM1_23">23&#160;</span> And changed the glory of the uncorruptible <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God into an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM1_24">24&#160;</span> Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_25">25&#160;</span> Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_26">26&#160;</span> For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_27">27&#160;</span> And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their error which was meet.
<span class="verse" id="RM1_28">28&#160;</span> And even as they did not like <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>to retain God in <span class='add'>their</span> knowledge, God gave them over to <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient;
<span class="verse" id="RM1_29">29&#160;</span> Being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers,
<span class="verse" id="RM1_30">30&#160;</span> Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
<span class="verse" id="RM1_31">31&#160;</span> Without understanding, covenantbreakers, <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful:
<span class="verse" id="RM1_32">32&#160;</span> Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>have pleasure in them that do them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM2_1">1&#160;</span> Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_2">2&#160;</span> But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them which commit such things.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_3">3&#160;</span> And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_4">4&#160;</span> Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_5">5&#160;</span> But after thy hardness and impenitent heart <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God;
<span class="verse" id="RM2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Who will render to every man according to his deeds:
<span class="verse" id="RM2_7">7&#160;</span> To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life:
<span class="verse" id="RM2_8">8&#160;</span> But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
<span class="verse" id="RM2_9">9&#160;</span> Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Gentile;
<span class="verse" id="RM2_10">10&#160;</span> But glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Gentile:
<span class="verse" id="RM2_11">11&#160;</span> For there is no respect of persons with God.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_12">12&#160;</span> For as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without law: and as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law;
<span class="verse" id="RM2_13">13&#160;</span>(For not the hearers of the law <span class='add'>are</span> just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_14">14&#160;</span> For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto themselves:
<span class="verse" id="RM2_15">15&#160;</span> Which shew the work of the law written in their hearts, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>their conscience also bearing witness, and <span class='add'>their</span> thoughts <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the mean while accusing or else excusing one another;)
<span class="verse" id="RM2_16">16&#160;</span> In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM2_17">17&#160;</span> Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God,
<span class="verse" id="RM2_18">18&#160;</span> And knowest <span class='add'>his</span> will, and <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of the law;
<span class="verse" id="RM2_19">19&#160;</span> And art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness,
<span class="verse" id="RM2_20">20&#160;</span> An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_21">21&#160;</span> Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_22">22&#160;</span> Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_23">23&#160;</span> Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_24">24&#160;</span> For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>written.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_25">25&#160;</span> For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision.
<span class="verse" id="RM2_26">26&#160;</span> Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_27">27&#160;</span> And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law?
<span class="verse" id="RM2_28">28&#160;</span> For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither <span class='add'>is that</span> circumcision, which is outward in the flesh:
<span class="verse" id="RM2_29">29&#160;</span> But he <span class='add'>is</span> a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision <span class='add'>is that</span> of the heart, in the spirit, <span class='add'>and</span> not in the letter; whose praise <span class='add'>is</span> not of men, but of God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM3_1">1&#160;</span> What advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit <span class='add'>is there</span> of circumcision?
<span class="verse" id="RM3_2">2&#160;</span> Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_3">3&#160;</span> For what if some did not believe? shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect?
<span class="verse" id="RM3_4">4&#160;</span> God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is written, <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>That thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_5">5&#160;</span> But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall we say? <span class='add'>Is</span> God unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a man)
<span class="verse" id="RM3_6">6&#160;</span> God forbid: for then how shall God judge the world?
<span class="verse" id="RM3_7">7&#160;</span> For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory; why yet am I also judged as a sinner?
<span class="verse" id="RM3_8">8&#160;</span> And not <span class='add'>rather</span>, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say,) Let us do evil, that good may come? whose damnation is just. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM3_9">9&#160;</span> What then? are we better <span class='add'>than they</span>? No, in no wise: for we have before <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under sin;
<span class="verse" id="RM3_10">10&#160;</span> As it is written, There is none righteous, no, not one:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_11">11&#160;</span> There is none that understandeth, there is none that seeketh after God.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_12">12&#160;</span> They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_13">13&#160;</span> Their throat <span class='add'>is</span> an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps <span class='add'>is</span> under their lips:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_14">14&#160;</span> Whose mouth <span class='add'>is</span> full of cursing and bitterness:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_15">15&#160;</span> Their feet <span class='add'>are</span> swift to shed blood:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_16">16&#160;</span> Destruction and misery <span class='add'>are</span> in their ways:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_17">17&#160;</span> And the way of peace have they not known:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_18">18&#160;</span> There is no fear of God before their eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM3_19">19&#160;</span> Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>guilty before God.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law <span class='add'>is</span> the knowledge of sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM3_21">21&#160;</span> But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets;
<span class="verse" id="RM3_22">22&#160;</span> Even the righteousness of God <span class='add'>which is</span> by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_23">23&#160;</span> For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;
<span class="verse" id="RM3_24">24&#160;</span> Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Christ Jesus:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_25">25&#160;</span> Whom God hath <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>set forth <span class='add'>to be</span> a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God;
<span class="verse" id="RM3_26">26&#160;</span> To declare, <span class='add'>I say</span>, at this time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_27">27&#160;</span> Where <span class='add'>is</span> boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is he</span> the God of the Jews only? <span class='add'>is he</span> not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also:
<span class="verse" id="RM3_30">30&#160;</span> Seeing <span class='add'>it is</span> one God, which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.
<span class="verse" id="RM3_31">31&#160;</span> Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM4_1">1&#160;</span> What shall we say then that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found?
<span class="verse" id="RM4_2">2&#160;</span> For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath <span class='add'>whereof</span> to glory; but not before God.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_3">3&#160;</span> For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_4">4&#160;</span> Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_5">5&#160;</span> But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_6">6&#160;</span> Even as David also describeth the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousness without works,
<span class="verse" id="RM4_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Saying</span>, Blessed <span class='add'>are</span> they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_8">8&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Cometh</span> this blessedness then upon the circumcision <span class='add'>only</span>, or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_10">10&#160;</span> How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_11">11&#160;</span> And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which <span class='add'>he had yet</span> being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also:
<span class="verse" id="RM4_12">12&#160;</span> And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which <span class='add'>he had</span> being <span class='add'>yet</span> uncircumcised.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_13">13&#160;</span> For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, <span class='add'>was</span> not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_14">14&#160;</span> For if they which are of the law <span class='add'>be</span> heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect:
<span class="verse" id="RM4_15">15&#160;</span> Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, <span class='add'>there is</span> no transgression.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore <span class='add'>it is</span> of faith, that <span class='add'>it might be</span> by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us all,
<span class="verse" id="RM4_17">17&#160;</span>(As it is written, <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I have made thee a father of many nations,) <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>before him whom he believed, <span class='add'>even</span> God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_18">18&#160;</span> Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many nations; according to that which was spoken, <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>So shall thy seed be.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_19">19&#160;</span> And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sara’s womb:
<span class="verse" id="RM4_20">20&#160;</span> He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God;
<span class="verse" id="RM4_21">21&#160;</span> And being fully persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_22">22&#160;</span> And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM4_23">23&#160;</span> Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him;
<span class="verse" id="RM4_24">24&#160;</span> But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead;
<span class="verse" id="RM4_25">25&#160;</span> Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM5_1">1&#160;</span> Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:
<span class="verse" id="RM5_2">2&#160;</span> By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_3">3&#160;</span> And not only <span class='add'>so</span>, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience;
<span class="verse" id="RM5_4">4&#160;</span> And patience, experience; and experience, hope:
<span class="verse" id="RM5_5">5&#160;</span> And hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_6">6&#160;</span> For when we were yet without strength, <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>in due time Christ died for the ungodly.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_7">7&#160;</span> For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_8">8&#160;</span> But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_9">9&#160;</span> Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_10">10&#160;</span> For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_11">11&#160;</span> And not only <span class='add'>so</span>, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM5_12">12&#160;</span> Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for that all have sinned:
<span class="verse" id="RM5_13">13&#160;</span>(For until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_14">14&#160;</span> Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam’s transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_15">15&#160;</span> But not as the offence, so also <span class='add'>is</span> the free gift. For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, <span class='add'>which is</span> by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_16">16&#160;</span> And not as <span class='add'>it was</span> by one that sinned, <span class='add'>so is</span> the gift: for the judgment <span class='add'>was</span> by one to condemnation, but the free gift <span class='add'>is</span> of many offences unto justification.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_17">17&#160;</span> For if <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by one man’s offence death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.)
<span class="verse" id="RM5_18">18&#160;</span> Therefore as <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by the offence of one <span class='add'>judgment came</span> upon all men to condemnation; even so <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by the righteousness of one <span class='add'>the free gift came</span> upon all men unto justification of life.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_19">19&#160;</span> For as by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
<span class="verse" id="RM5_20">20&#160;</span> Moreover the law entered, that the offence might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound:
<span class="verse" id="RM5_21">21&#160;</span> That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM6_1">1&#160;</span> What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?
<span class="verse" id="RM6_2">2&#160;</span> God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
<span class="verse" id="RM6_3">3&#160;</span> Know ye not, that so many of us as <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?
<span class="verse" id="RM6_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_5">5&#160;</span> For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also <span class='add'>in the likeness</span> of <span class='add'>his</span> resurrection:
<span class="verse" id="RM6_6">6&#160;</span> Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with <span class='add'>him</span>, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_7">7&#160;</span> For he that is dead is <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>freed from sin.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_8">8&#160;</span> Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him:
<span class="verse" id="RM6_9">9&#160;</span> Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_10">10&#160;</span> For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_11">11&#160;</span> Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_12">12&#160;</span> Let not sin <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_13">13&#160;</span> Neither yield ye your members <span class='add'>as</span> <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members <span class='add'>as</span> instruments of righteousness unto God.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_14">14&#160;</span> For sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_15">15&#160;</span> What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_16">16&#160;</span> Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?
<span class="verse" id="RM6_17">17&#160;</span> But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>which was delivered you.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_18">18&#160;</span> Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_19">19&#160;</span> I speak after the manner of men because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_20">20&#160;</span> For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>from righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_21">21&#160;</span> What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things <span class='add'>is</span> death.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_22">22&#160;</span> But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.
<span class="verse" id="RM6_23">23&#160;</span> For the wages of sin <span class='add'>is</span> death; but the gift of God <span class='add'>is</span> eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM7_1">1&#160;</span> Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law,) how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?
<span class="verse" id="RM7_2">2&#160;</span> For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to <span class='add'>her</span> husband so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><span class='add'>her</span> husband.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_3">3&#160;</span> So then if, while <span class='add'>her</span> husband liveth, she be married to another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if her husband be dead, she is free from that law; so that she is no adulteress, though she be married to another man.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_4">4&#160;</span> Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to another, <span class='add'>even</span> to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_5">5&#160;</span> For when we were in the flesh, the <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_6">6&#160;</span> But now we are delivered from the law, <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not <span class='add'>in</span> the oldness of the letter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM7_7">7&#160;</span> What shall we say then? <span class='add'>Is</span> the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_8">8&#160;</span> But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin <span class='add'>was</span> dead.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_9">9&#160;</span> For I was alive without the law once: but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_10">10&#160;</span> And the commandment, which <span class='add'>was ordained</span> to life, I found <span class='add'>to be</span> unto death.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_11">11&#160;</span> For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me, and by it slew <span class='add'>me</span>.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_12">12&#160;</span> Wherefore the law <span class='add'>is</span> holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_13">13&#160;</span> Was <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>then that which is good made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_14">14&#160;</span> For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_15">15&#160;</span> For that which I do I <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_16">16&#160;</span> If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that <span class='add'>it is</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_17">17&#160;</span> Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_18">18&#160;</span> For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but <span class='add'>how</span> to perform that which is good I find not.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_19">19&#160;</span> For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_20">20&#160;</span> Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_21">21&#160;</span> I find then a law, that, when I would do good, evil is present with me.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_22">22&#160;</span> For I delight in the law of God after the inward man:
<span class="verse" id="RM7_23">23&#160;</span> But I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.
<span class="verse" id="RM7_24">24&#160;</span> O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the body of this death?
<span class="verse" id="RM7_25">25&#160;</span> I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM8_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_2">2&#160;</span> For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_3">3&#160;</span> For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for sin, condemned sin in the flesh:
<span class="verse" id="RM8_4">4&#160;</span> That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_5">5&#160;</span> For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_6">6&#160;</span> For <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to be carnally minded <span class='add'>is</span> death; but <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to be spiritually minded <span class='add'>is</span> life and peace.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_7">7&#160;</span> Because <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the carnal mind <span class='add'>is</span> enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_8">8&#160;</span> So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_9">9&#160;</span> But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_10">10&#160;</span> And if Christ <span class='add'>be</span> in you, the body <span class='add'>is</span> dead because of sin; but the Spirit <span class='add'>is</span> life because of righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_11">11&#160;</span> But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM8_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_13">13&#160;</span> For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_14">14&#160;</span> For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_15">15&#160;</span> For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_16">16&#160;</span> The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God:
<span class="verse" id="RM8_17">17&#160;</span> And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suffer with <span class='add'>him</span>, that we may be also glorified together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM8_18">18&#160;</span> For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time <span class='add'>are</span> not worthy <span class='add'>to be compared</span> with the glory which shall be revealed in us.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_19">19&#160;</span> For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_20">20&#160;</span> For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected <span class='add'>the same</span> in hope,
<span class="verse" id="RM8_21">21&#160;</span> Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_22">22&#160;</span> For we know that <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_23">23&#160;</span> And not only <span class='add'>they</span>, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, the <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>redemption of our body.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_24">24&#160;</span> For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?
<span class="verse" id="RM8_25">25&#160;</span> But if we hope for that we see not, <span class='add'>then</span> do we with patience wait for <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_26">26&#160;</span> Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_27">27&#160;</span> And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what <span class='add'>is</span> the mind of the Spirit, <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>because he maketh intercession for the saints according to <span class='add'>the will of</span> God.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_28">28&#160;</span> And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to <span class='add'>his</span> purpose.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_29">29&#160;</span> For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate <span class='add'>to be</span> conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_30">30&#160;</span> Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_31">31&#160;</span> What shall we then say to these things? If God <span class='add'>be</span> for us, who <span class='add'>can be</span> against us?
<span class="verse" id="RM8_32">32&#160;</span> He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
<span class="verse" id="RM8_33">33&#160;</span> Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? <span class='add'>It is</span> God that justifieth.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_34">34&#160;</span> Who <span class='add'>is</span> he that condemneth? <span class='add'>It is</span> Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_35">35&#160;</span> Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? <span class='add'>shall</span> tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
<span class="verse" id="RM8_36">36&#160;</span> As it is written, <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For thy sake we are killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_37">37&#160;</span> Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.
<span class="verse" id="RM8_38">38&#160;</span> For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
<span class="verse" id="RM8_39">39&#160;</span> Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM9_1">1&#160;</span> I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost,
<span class="verse" id="RM9_2">2&#160;</span> That I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_3">3&#160;</span> For I could wish that myself were <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh:
<span class="verse" id="RM9_4">4&#160;</span> Who are Israelites; to whom <span class='add'>pertaineth</span> the adoption, and the glory, and the <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service <span class='add'>of God</span>, and the promises;
<span class="verse" id="RM9_5">5&#160;</span> Whose <span class='add'>are</span> the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ <span class='add'>came</span>, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM9_6">6&#160;</span> Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. For they <span class='add'>are</span> not all Israel, which are of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="RM9_7">7&#160;</span> Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, <span class='add'>are they</span> all children: but, <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>In Isaac shall thy seed be called.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_8">8&#160;</span> That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these <span class='add'>are</span> not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the seed.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_9">9&#160;</span> For this <span class='add'>is</span> the word of promise, <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>At this time will I come, and Sara shall have a son.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_10">10&#160;</span> And not only <span class='add'>this</span>; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, <span class='add'>even</span> by our father Isaac;
<span class="verse" id="RM9_11">11&#160;</span>(For <span class='add'>the children</span> being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth;)
<span class="verse" id="RM9_12">12&#160;</span> It was said unto her, <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>elder shall serve the <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>younger.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_13">13&#160;</span> As it is written, <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM9_14">14&#160;</span> What shall we say then? <span class='add'>Is there</span> unrighteousness with God? God forbid.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_15">15&#160;</span> For he saith to Moses, <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_16">16&#160;</span> So then <span class='add'>it is</span> not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_17">17&#160;</span> For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_18">18&#160;</span> Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will <span class='add'>have mercy</span>, and whom he will he hardeneth.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_19">19&#160;</span> Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will?
<span class="verse" id="RM9_20">20&#160;</span> Nay but, O man, who art thou that <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>repliest against God? <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Shall the thing formed say to him that formed <span class='add'>it</span>, Why hast thou made me thus?
<span class="verse" id="RM9_21">21&#160;</span> Hath not the <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour?
<span class="verse" id="RM9_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>What</span> if God, willing to shew <span class='add'>his</span> wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fitted to destruction:
<span class="verse" id="RM9_23">23&#160;</span> And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory,
<span class="verse" id="RM9_24">24&#160;</span> Even us, whom he hath called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles?
<span class="verse" id="RM9_25">25&#160;</span> As he saith also in Osee, <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will call them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> in the place where it was said unto them, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> not my people; there shall they be called the children of the living God.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_27">27&#160;</span> Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved:
<span class="verse" id="RM9_28">28&#160;</span> For he will finish <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the work, and cut <span class='add'>it</span> short in righteousness: because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_29">29&#160;</span> And as Esaias said before, <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_30">30&#160;</span> What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_31">31&#160;</span> But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.
<span class="verse" id="RM9_32">32&#160;</span> Wherefore? Because <span class='add'>they sought it</span> not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone;
<span class="verse" id="RM9_33">33&#160;</span> As it is written, <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on him shall not be <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ashamed.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM10_1">1&#160;</span> Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_2">2&#160;</span> For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_3">3&#160;</span> For they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_4">4&#160;</span> For Christ <span class='add'>is</span> the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_5">5&#160;</span> For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law, <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>That the man which doeth those things shall live by them.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_6">6&#160;</span> But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise, <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down <span class='add'>from above</span>:)
<span class="verse" id="RM10_7">7&#160;</span> Or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)
<span class="verse" id="RM10_8">8&#160;</span> But what saith it? <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The word is nigh thee, <span class='add'>even</span> in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach;
<span class="verse" id="RM10_9">9&#160;</span> That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_10">10&#160;</span> For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_11">11&#160;</span> For the scripture saith, <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_12">12&#160;</span> For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_14">14&#160;</span> How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?
<span class="verse" id="RM10_15">15&#160;</span> And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written, <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!
<span class="verse" id="RM10_16">16&#160;</span> But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Lord, who hath believed <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>our <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>report?
<span class="verse" id="RM10_17">17&#160;</span> So then faith <span class='add'>cometh</span> by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_18">18&#160;</span> But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_19">19&#160;</span> But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses saith, <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I will provoke you to jealousy by <span class='add'>them that are</span> no people, <span class='add'>and</span> by a foolish nation I will anger you.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_20">20&#160;</span> But Esaias is very bold, and saith, <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.
<span class="verse" id="RM10_21">21&#160;</span> But to Israel he saith, <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM11_1">1&#160;</span> I say then, Hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, <span class='add'>of</span> the tribe of Benjamin.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_2">2&#160;</span> God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh intercession to God against Israel, saying,
<span class="verse" id="RM11_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and digged down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_4">4&#160;</span> But what saith the answer of God unto him? <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to <span class='add'>the image of</span> Baal.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_5">5&#160;</span> Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_6">6&#160;</span> And if by grace, then <span class='add'>is it</span> no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if <span class='add'>it be</span> of works, then is it no more grace: otherwise work is no more work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM11_7">7&#160;</span> What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were <a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blinded
<span class="verse" id="RM11_8">8&#160;</span>(According as it is written, <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God hath given them the spirit of <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>slumber, <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear;) unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_9">9&#160;</span> And David saith, <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumblingblock, and a recompence unto them:
<span class="verse" id="RM11_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see, and bow down their back alway.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_11">11&#160;</span> I say then, Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid: but <span class='add'>rather</span> through their fall salvation <span class='add'>is come</span> unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_12">12&#160;</span> Now if the fall of them <span class='add'>be</span> the riches of the world, and the <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fulness? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM11_13">13&#160;</span> For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office:
<span class="verse" id="RM11_14">14&#160;</span> If by any means I may provoke to emulation <span class='add'>them which are</span> my flesh, and might save some of them.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_15">15&#160;</span> For if the casting away of them <span class='add'>be</span> the reconciling of the world, what <span class='add'>shall</span> the receiving <span class='add'>of them be</span>, but life from the dead?
<span class="verse" id="RM11_16">16&#160;</span> For if the firstfruit <span class='add'>be</span> holy, the lump <span class='add'>is</span> also <span class='add'>holy</span>: and if the root <span class='add'>be</span> holy, so <span class='add'>are</span> the branches.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_17">17&#160;</span> And if some of the branches be broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wert graffed in <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>among them, and with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree;
<span class="verse" id="RM11_18">18&#160;</span> Boast not against the branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_19">19&#160;</span> Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_20">20&#160;</span> Well; because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not highminded, but fear:
<span class="verse" id="RM11_21">21&#160;</span> For if God spared not the natural branches, <span class='add'>take heed</span> lest he also spare not thee.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_22">22&#160;</span> Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in <span class='add'>his</span> goodness: otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_23">23&#160;</span> And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to graff them in again.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_24">24&#160;</span> For if thou wert cut out of the olive tree which is wild by nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree: how much more shall these, which be the natural <span class='add'>branches</span>, be graffed into their own olive tree? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM11_25">25&#160;</span> For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_26">26&#160;</span> And so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob:
<span class="verse" id="RM11_27">27&#160;</span> For this <span class='add'>is</span> my covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_28">28&#160;</span> As concerning the gospel, <span class='add'>they are</span> enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, <span class='add'>they are</span> beloved for the fathers’ sakes.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_29">29&#160;</span> For the gifts and calling of God <span class='add'>are</span> without repentance.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_30">30&#160;</span> For as ye in times past have not <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief:
<span class="verse" id="RM11_31">31&#160;</span> Even so have these also now not <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.
<span class="verse" id="RM11_32">32&#160;</span> For God hath <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM11_33">33&#160;</span> O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable <span class='add'>are</span> his judgments, and his ways past finding out!
<span class="verse" id="RM11_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?
<span class="verse" id="RM11_35">35&#160;</span> Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again?
<span class="verse" id="RM11_36">36&#160;</span> For of him, and through him, and to him, <span class='add'>are</span> all things: to whom <span class='add'>be</span> glory for ever. Amen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM12_1">1&#160;</span> I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, <span class='add'>which is</span> your reasonable service.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_2">2&#160;</span> And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what <span class='add'>is</span> that good, <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>and acceptable, and perfect, will of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM12_3">3&#160;</span> For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think <span class='add'>of himself</span> more highly than he ought to think; but to think <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_4">4&#160;</span> For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office:
<span class="verse" id="RM12_5">5&#160;</span> So we, <span class='add'>being</span> many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_6">6&#160;</span> Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, <span class='add'>let us prophesy</span> according to the proportion of faith;
<span class="verse" id="RM12_7">7&#160;</span> Or ministry, <span class='add'>let us wait</span> on <span class='add'>our</span> ministering: or he that teacheth, on teaching;
<span class="verse" id="RM12_8">8&#160;</span> Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>giveth, <span class='add'>let him do it</span> <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM12_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Let</span> love be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Be</span> kindly affectioned one to another <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>with brotherly love; in honour preferring one another;
<span class="verse" id="RM12_11">11&#160;</span> Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord;
<span class="verse" id="RM12_12">12&#160;</span> Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in prayer;
<span class="verse" id="RM12_13">13&#160;</span> Distributing to the necessity of saints; given to hospitality.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_14">14&#160;</span> Bless them which persecute you: bless, and curse not.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_15">15&#160;</span> Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Be</span> of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_17">17&#160;</span> Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of all men.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_18">18&#160;</span> If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_19">19&#160;</span> Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but <span class='add'>rather</span> give place unto wrath: for it is written, <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Vengeance <span class='add'>is</span> mine; I will repay, saith the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.
<span class="verse" id="RM12_21">21&#160;</span> Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM13_1">1&#160;</span> Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ordained of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_2">2&#160;</span> Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_3">3&#160;</span> For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same:
<span class="verse" id="RM13_4">4&#160;</span> For he is the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to <span class='add'>execute</span> wrath upon him that doeth evil.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_5">5&#160;</span> Wherefore <span class='add'>ye</span> must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_6">6&#160;</span> For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God’s ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_7">7&#160;</span> Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute <span class='add'>is due</span>; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_8">8&#160;</span> Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfilled the law.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_9">9&#160;</span> For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Thou shalt not covet; and if <span class='add'>there be</span> any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_10">10&#160;</span> Love worketh no ill to his neighbour: therefore love <span class='add'>is</span> the fulfilling of the law.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_11">11&#160;</span> And that, knowing the time, that now <span class='add'>it is</span> high time to awake out of sleep: for now <span class='add'>is</span> our salvation nearer than when we believed.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_12">12&#160;</span> The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armour of light.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_13">13&#160;</span> Let us walk <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.
<span class="verse" id="RM13_14">14&#160;</span> But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to <span class='add'>fulfil</span> the lusts <span class='add'>thereof.</span>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM14_1">1&#160;</span> Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, <span class='add'>but</span> <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>not to doubtful disputations.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_2">2&#160;</span> For one believeth that he may eat all things: another, who is weak, eateth herbs.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_3">3&#160;</span> Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_4">4&#160;</span> Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him stand.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_5">5&#160;</span> One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every day <span class='add'>alike</span>. Let every man be <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>fully persuaded in his own mind.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_6">6&#160;</span> He that <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>regardeth <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the day, regardeth <span class='add'>it</span> unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard <span class='add'>it</span>. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_7">7&#160;</span> For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_8">8&#160;</span> For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord’s.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_9">9&#160;</span> For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_10">10&#160;</span> But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy brother? <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>for <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_11">11&#160;</span> For it is written, <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_12">12&#160;</span> So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_13">13&#160;</span> Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in <span class='add'>his</span> brother’s way.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_14">14&#160;</span> I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unclean of itself: but to him that esteemeth any thing to be <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>unclean, to him <span class='add'>it is</span> unclean.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_15">15&#160;</span> But if thy brother be grieved with <span class='add'>thy</span> meat, now walkest thou not <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>charitably. <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_16">16&#160;</span> Let not then your good be evil spoken of:
<span class="verse" id="RM14_17">17&#160;</span> For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_18">18&#160;</span> For he that in these things serveth Christ <span class='add'>is</span> acceptable to God, and approved of men.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_19">19&#160;</span> Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_20">20&#160;</span> For meat destroy not the work of God. <a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>All things indeed <span class='add'>are</span> pure; but <span class='add'>it is</span> evil for that man who eateth with offence.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> good neither to eat <a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>flesh, nor to drink wine, nor <span class='add'>any thing</span> whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_22">22&#160;</span> Hast thou faith? have <span class='add'>it</span> to thyself before God. Happy <span class='add'>is</span> he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he alloweth.
<span class="verse" id="RM14_23">23&#160;</span> And he that <a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>doubteth is damned if he eat, because <span class='add'>he eateth</span> not of faith: for whatsoever <span class='add'>is</span> not of faith is sin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM15_1">1&#160;</span> We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_2">2&#160;</span> Let every one of us please <span class='add'>his</span> neighbour for <span class='add'>his</span> good to edification.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_3">3&#160;</span> For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is written, <a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell on me.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_4">4&#160;</span> For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another <a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>according to Christ Jesus:
<span class="verse" id="RM15_6">6&#160;</span> That ye may with one mind <span class='add'>and</span> one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM15_7">7&#160;</span> Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_8">8&#160;</span> Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises <span class='add'>made</span> unto the fathers:
<span class="verse" id="RM15_9">9&#160;</span> And that the Gentiles might glorify God for <span class='add'>his</span> mercy; as it is written, <a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For this cause I will confess to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_10">10&#160;</span> And again he saith, <a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_11">11&#160;</span> And again, <a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles; and laud him, all ye people.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_12">12&#160;</span> And again, Esaias saith, <a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shall the Gentiles trust.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_13">13&#160;</span> Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_14">14&#160;</span> And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one another.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_15">15&#160;</span> Nevertheless, brethren, I have written the more boldly unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me of God,
<span class="verse" id="RM15_16">16&#160;</span> That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the <a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_17">17&#160;</span> I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to God.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_18">18&#160;</span> For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and deed,
<span class="verse" id="RM15_19">19&#160;</span> Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_20">20&#160;</span> Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man’s foundation:
<span class="verse" id="RM15_21">21&#160;</span> But as it is written, <a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they that have not heard shall understand.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_22">22&#160;</span> For which cause also I have been <a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>much hindered from coming to you.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_23">23&#160;</span> But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire these many years to come unto you;
<span class="verse" id="RM15_24">24&#160;</span> Whensoever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you: for I trust to see you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat filled <a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with your <span class='add'>company</span>.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_25">25&#160;</span> But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_26">26&#160;</span> For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor saints which are at Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_27">27&#160;</span> It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_28">28&#160;</span> When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will come by you into Spain.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_29">29&#160;</span> And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the fulness of the blessing of the gospel of Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM15_30">30&#160;</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in <span class='add'>your</span> prayers to God for me;
<span class="verse" id="RM15_31">31&#160;</span> That I may be delivered from them that <a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>do not believe in Judaea; and that my service which <span class='add'>I have</span> for Jerusalem may be accepted of the saints;
<span class="verse" id="RM15_32">32&#160;</span> That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed.
<span class="verse" id="RM15_33">33&#160;</span> Now the God of peace <span class='add'>be</span> with you all. Amen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RM16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM16_1">1&#160;</span> I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea:
<span class="verse" id="RM16_2">2&#160;</span> That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she hath need of you: for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_3">3&#160;</span> Greet Priscilla and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus:
<span class="verse" id="RM16_4">4&#160;</span> Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the churches of the Gentiles.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_5">5&#160;</span> Likewise <span class='add'>greet</span> the church that is in their house. Salute my wellbeloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_6">6&#160;</span> Greet Mary, who bestowed much labour on us.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_7">7&#160;</span> Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my fellowprisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_8">8&#160;</span> Greet Amplias my beloved in the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_9">9&#160;</span> Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_10">10&#160;</span> Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus’ <a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>household</span>.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_11">11&#160;</span> Salute Herodion my kinsman. Greet them that be of the <a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>household</span> of Narcissus, which are in the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_12">12&#160;</span> Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_13">13&#160;</span> Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_14">14&#160;</span> Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_15">15&#160;</span> Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with them.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_16">16&#160;</span> Salute one another with an holy kiss. The churches of Christ salute you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM16_17">17&#160;</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_18">18&#160;</span> For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_19">19&#160;</span> For your obedience is come abroad unto all <span class='add'>men</span>. I am glad therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is good, and <a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>simple concerning evil.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_20">20&#160;</span> And the God of peace shall <a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bruise Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ <span class='add'>be</span> with you. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM16_21">21&#160;</span> Timotheus my workfellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_22">22&#160;</span> I Tertius, who wrote <span class='add'>this</span> epistle, salute you in the Lord.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_23">23&#160;</span> Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother.
<span class="verse" id="RM16_24">24&#160;</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ <span class='add'>be</span> with you all. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RM16_25">25&#160;</span> Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began,
<span class="verse" id="RM16_26">26&#160;</span> But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith:
<span class="verse" id="RM16_27">27&#160;</span> To God only wise, <span class='add'>be</span> glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='s'>Written to the Romans from Corinthus, <span class='add'>and sent</span> by Phebe servant of the church at Cenchrea. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_2'>13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">determined.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to the obedience of faith.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in my spirit.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in you.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in you.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Hab. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK2_4'>2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to them.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">that they may be.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_20'>106. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to acknowledge.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">a mind void of judgment.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">unsociable.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM1_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">consent with them.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Jam. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_3'>5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>62. 12</a>. Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_27'>16. 27</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_12'>22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">Greek.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">Greek.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">the conscience witnessing with them.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">between themselves.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">triest the things that differ.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM2_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_5'>52. 5</a>. Ezek. 36. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK36_20'>20</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK36_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS51_4'>51. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM3_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">charged.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM3_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">subject to the judgment of God.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM3_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.24</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Jesus Christ]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM3_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">foreordained.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM3_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">passing over.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM4_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> who]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM4_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_5'>17. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM4_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">like unto him.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM4_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_5'>15. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM5_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">according to the time.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM5_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in whom.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM5_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">by one offence.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM5_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">by one offence.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM5_18"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">by one righteousness.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM6_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">are.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM6_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">justified.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM6_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 reign therefore]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM6_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">arms, or, weapons.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM6_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">whereto ye were delivered.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM6_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">to righteousness.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_2"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 the husband]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">passions.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">being dead to that.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">concupiscence.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 that then]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">know.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM7_24"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">this body of death.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">by a sacrifice for sin.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">the minding of the flesh.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">the minding of the Spirit.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">the minding of the flesh.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">because of his Spirit.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">every creature.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_28'>21. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_27"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">that.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM8_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.36</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_22'>41. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">separated.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">testaments.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_12'>21. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN18_10'>18. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN25_23'>25. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">greater.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">lesser.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Mal. 1. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_2'>2</a>, <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_19'>33. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_16'>9. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">answerest again,</span> or, <span class="add">disputest with God?</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_9'>45. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_6'>18. 6</a> Wis. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR15_7'>15. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">made up</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_23'>2. 23</a> 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_10'>2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS1_10'>1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. 10. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_22'>22</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_28"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">the account.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_9'>1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_14'>8. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_16'>28. 16</a> 1 Pet. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_6'>2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM9_33"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">confounded.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_5'>18. 5</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_11'>20. 11</a>. Gal. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL8_12'>8. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_12'>30. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_14'>30. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_16'>28. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_32'>2. 32</a> Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_21'>2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_7'>52. 7</a>. Nah. <a href='NAM.xhtml#NM1_15'>1. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_1'>53. 1</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_38'>12. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">the hearing of us.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">preaching.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_4'>19. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_21'>32. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_1'>65. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM10_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_2'>65. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. 19. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_10'>10</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Kin. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_18'>19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">hardened.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_10'>29. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">remorse.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_9'>6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_22'>69. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_23'>69. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">decay,</span> or, <span class="add">loss.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">for them.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_25"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">hardness.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_20'>59. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_30"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">obeyed.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">obeyed.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_32"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">shut them all up together.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM11_34"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_13'>40. 13</a>. Wisd. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_13'>9. 13</a> 1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_16'>2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_2"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 that acceptable]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr <span class="add">to sobriety.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">imparteth.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">liberally.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in the love of the brethren.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">be contented with mean things.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_35'>32. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM12_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_21'>25. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM13_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">ordered.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM13_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">decently.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">not to judge</span> his <span class="add">doubtful thoughts.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">fully assured.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">observeth.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 a day]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 <span class="add">omits</span> for]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_10'>5. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_23'>45. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">common.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">common.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class="add">according to charity.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C18_11'>8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">1. 15.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C18_13'>8. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM14_23"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">discerneth and putteth a difference between meats.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_9'>69. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Cor. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C11_10'>1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">after the example of.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_49'>18. 49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_43'>32 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS117_1'>117. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_10'>11. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">sacrificing.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_15'>52. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_22"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">many ways,</span> or, <span class="add">oftentimes,</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15.24</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_32'>32.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM15_31"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 15.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">are disobedient.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM16_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, friends.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM16_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, friends.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM16_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">harmless.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RM16_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">tread.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
