<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Sirach 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Sirach</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_0'>51</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='SR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach, or Ecclesiasticus  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='s'>A Prologue made by an uncertain Author. <a href='#FN1' id="sirachprologuenote1"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a></div>
<div class='p'>This Jesus was the son of Sirach, and grandchild to Jesus of the same name with him: this man therefore lived in the latter times, after the people had been led away captive, and called home again, and almost after all the prophets. Now his grandfather Jesus, as he himself witnesseth, was a man of great diligence and wisdom among the Hebrews, who did not only gather the grave and short sentences of wise men, that had been before him, but himself also uttered some of his own, full of much understanding and wisdom. When as therefore the first Jesus died, leaving this book almost <a href='#FN2' id="sirachprologuenote2"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>perfected, Sirach his son receiving it after him left it to his own son Jesus, who, having gotten it into his hands, compiled it all orderly into one volume, and called it Wisdom, intituling it both by his own name, his father’s name, and his grandfather’s; alluring the hearer by the very name of Wisdom to have a greater love to the study of this book. It containeth therefore wise sayings, <a href='#FN3' id="sirachprologuenote3"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>dark sentences, and parables, and <a href='#FN4' id="sirachprologuenote4"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>certain particular ancient godly stories of men <a href='#FN5' id="sirachprologuenote5"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>that pleased God; also <a href='#FN6' id="sirachprologuenote6"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>his prayer and <a href='#FN7' id="sirachprologuenote7"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>song; moreover, what benefits God had vouchsafed his people, and what plagues he had heaped upon their enemies. This Jesus did imitate Solomon, and was no less famous for wisdom and learning, both being indeed a man of great learning, and so reputed also. </div>
<div class='s'>The Prologue of the Wisdom of <a href='#FN8' id="sirachprologuenote8"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Jesus the Son of Sirach. </div>
<div class='p'>Whereas many and great things have been delivered unto us by <a href='#FN9' id="sirachprologuenote9"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the law and the prophets, and by others that have followed their steps, for the which things Israel ought to be commended for learning and wisdom; and whereof not only the readers must needs become skilful themselves, but also they that desire to learn be able to profit them which are <a href='#FN10' id="sirachprologuenote10"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>without, both by speaking and writing: my grandfather Jesus, when he had much given himself to the reading of <a href='#FN11' id="sirachprologuenote11"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the law, and the prophets, and other books of our fathers, and had gotten therein good judgment, was drawn on also himself to write something pertaining to learning and wisdom; to the intent that those which are desirous to learn, and are addicted to these things, might profit much more in living according to the law. Wherefore let me intreat you to read it with favour and attention, and to pardon us, wherein we may seem to come short of some words, which we have laboured to interpret. For the same things uttered in <a href='#FN12' id="sirachprologuenote12"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Hebrew, and translated into another tongue, have not the same force in them: and not only these things, but <a href='#FN13' id="sirachprologuenote13"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the law itself, and the <a href='#FN14' id="sirachprologuenote14"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets, and the rest of the books, have no small <a href='#FN15' id="sirachprologuenote15"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>difference, when they are spoken in their own language. <a href='#FN16' id="sirachprologuenote16"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For in the eight and thirtieth year coming into Egypt, when Euergetes was king, and continuing there some time, I found a <a href='#FN17' id="sirachprologuenote17"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>book of no small learning: therefore I thought it most necessary for me to bestow some diligence and travail to interpret it; using great watchfulness and skill in that space to bring the book to an end, and set it forth for them also, which <a href='#FN18' id="sirachprologuenote18"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in a strange country are willing to learn, being prepared before in manners to live after the law. </div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="SR1_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>All wisdom cometh from the Lord, and <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>is with him for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Who can number the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, and the days of eternity? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_3">3&#160;</span>Who can find out the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the deep, and wisdom? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Wisdom hath been created before all things, and the understanding of prudence from everlasting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_5">5&#160;</span>The word of God most high is <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the fountain of wisdom; and her ways are everlasting commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_6">6&#160;</span>To whom hath <a href='#FN25'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the root of wisdom been revealed? or who hath known her wise counsels? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Unto whom hath the knowledge of wisdom been made manifest? and who hath understood her great experience?</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_8">8&#160;</span>There is one wise and greatly to be feared, the Lord sitting upon his throne. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_9">9&#160;</span>He created her, and saw her, and <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>numbered her, and poured her out upon all his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_10">10&#160;</span>She is with all flesh according to his gift, and he hath given her to them that love him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_11">11&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is honour, and glory, and <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>gladness, and a crown of rejoicing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_12">12&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord maketh a merry heart, and giveth joy, and gladness, and a long life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_13">13&#160;</span>Whoso feareth the Lord, it shall go well with him <a href='#FN28'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>at the last, and he <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall find favour in the day of his death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: and it was created with the faithful in the womb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>She hath built an everlasting foundation with men, and she shall <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>continue with their seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>To fear the Lord is fulness of wisdom, and filleth men with her fruits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>She filleth all their house with things desirable, and the garners with her increase. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_18">18&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom, making peace and perfect health to flourish; both which are the gifts of God: and it enlargeth their rejoicing that love him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_19">19&#160;</span>Wisdom <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>raineth down skill and knowledge of understanding standing, and exalteth them to honour that hold her fast. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and the branches thereof are <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>long life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_21">21&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord driveth away sins: and where it is present, it turneth away wrath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_22">22&#160;</span>A furious man cannot <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be justified; for the sway of his fury shall be his destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>A patient man will tear for a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_24">24&#160;</span>He will hide his words for a time, and the lips of <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>many shall declare his wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>The parables of knowledge are in the treasures of wisdom: but godliness is an abomination to a sinner. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_26">26&#160;</span>If thou desire wisdom, <a href='#FN42'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>keep the commandments, and <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the Lord shall give her unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_27">27&#160;</span>For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and instruction: and faith and meekness are his delight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Distrust not the fear of the Lord when thou art poor: and come not unto him <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>with a double heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_29">29&#160;</span>Be not an hypocrite in the sight of men, and <a href='#FN46'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>take good heed what thou speakest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall, and bring dishonour upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee down <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>in the midst of the congregation, because thou camest not in truth to the fear of the Lord, but thy heart is <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>full of deceit.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_1">1&#160;</span>My son, <a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_2">2&#160;</span>Set thy heart aright, and <a href='#FN51'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>constantly endure, and <a href='#FN52'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>make not haste in time of <a href='#FN53'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>trouble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Cleave unto him, and depart not away, that thou mayest be increased <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>at thy last end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_4">4&#160;</span>Whatsoever <a href='#FN56'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>is brought upon thee take cheerfully, and be patient when thou art changed to <a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>a low estate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_5">5&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>gold is tried in the fire, and <a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>acceptable men in the furnace of <a href='#FN60'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>adversity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Believe in him, and he will help thee; order thy way aright, and trust in him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_7">7&#160;</span>Ye that fear the Lord, <a href='#FN62'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>wait for his mercy; and <a href='#FN63'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>go not aside, lest ye fall. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_8">8&#160;</span>Ye that fear the Lord, believe him; and your reward shall not fail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_9">9&#160;</span>Ye that fear the Lord, hope for good, and for everlasting joy and mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Look at the generations of old, and see; did ever any trust in the Lord, and was confounded? or did any abide in his fear, and was forsaken? or <a href='#FN65'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>whom did he ever despise, that called upon him? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_11">11&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN66'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, longsuffering, and very pitiful, and <a href='#FN67'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>forgiveth sins, and saveth in time of affliction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_12">12&#160;</span>Woe be to <a href='#FN68'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>fearful hearts, and <a href='#FN69'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>faint hands, and the sinner that goeth <a href='#FN70'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>two ways! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_13">13&#160;</span>Woe unto him that is fainthearted! for he believeth not; therefore shall he not be defended. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_14">14&#160;</span>Woe unto you <a href='#FN71'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>that have lost patience! and what will ye do when the Lord shall <a href='#FN72'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>visit you? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_15">15&#160;</span>They that fear the Lord will not disobey his Word; and <a href='#FN73'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>they that love him will keep his ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_16">16&#160;</span>They that fear the Lord will seek that which is well, pleasing unto him; and they that love him shall be filled with the law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_17">17&#160;</span>They that fear the Lord will <a href='#FN74'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in his sight, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Saying, <a href='#FN76'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>We will fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands of men: for as his <a href='#FN77'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>majesty is, so is his mercy.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_1">1&#160;</span>Hear me your father, O children, and do thereafter, that ye may be safe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_2">2&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN78'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the Lord hath given the father honour over the children, and hath confirmed the <a href='#FN79'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>authority of the mother over the sons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_3">3&#160;</span>Whoso honoureth his father maketh an atonement for his sins: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_4">4&#160;</span>And he that honoureth his mother is as one that <a href='#FN80'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>layeth up treasure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_5">5&#160;</span>Whoso honoureth his father shall have joy of his own children; and when he maketh his prayer, he shall be heard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_6">6&#160;</span>He that honoureth his father <a href='#FN81'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>shall have a long life; and he that is obedient unto the Lord shall <a href='#FN82'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>be a comfort to his mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_7">7&#160;</span>He that feareth the Lord will honour his father, and will do service unto his parents, as to his masters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Honour thy father and mother both in word and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_9">9&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN84'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the blessing of the father establisheth the houses of children; but the curse of the mother rooteth out foundations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_10">10&#160;</span>Glory not in the dishonour of thy father; for thy father’s dishonour is no glory unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_11">11&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN85'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the glory of a man is from the honour of his father; and a mother in dishonour is a reproach to the children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_12">12&#160;</span>My son, help thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he liveth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_13">13&#160;</span>And if his understanding fail, have patience with him; and despise him not when thou art <a href='#FN86'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in thy full strength. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_14">14&#160;</span>For the relieving of thy father shall not be forgotten: and instead of sins it shall be added <a href='#FN87'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>to build thee up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_15">15&#160;</span>In the day of thine affliction it shall be remembered; thy sins also shall melt away, as the ice in the <a href='#FN88'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>fair warm weather. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_16">16&#160;</span>He that forsaketh his father is as a blasphemer; and he that angereth his mother is cursed: of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_17">17&#160;</span>My son, go on with thy business in meekness; so shalt thou be beloved of <a href='#FN89'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>him that is approved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>The greater thou art, the more humble thyself, and thou shalt <a href='#FN91'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>find favour before the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_19">19&#160;</span>Many are in high place, and of renown: but <a href='#FN92'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>mysteries are revealed unto the meek. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_20">20&#160;</span>For the power of the Lord is great, and he is honoured of the lowly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Seek not out things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_22">22&#160;</span>But what is commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence, for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_23">23&#160;</span>Be not <a href='#FN94'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>curious in unnecessary matters: for more things are shewed unto thee than men understand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_24">24&#160;</span>For many are deceived by their own vain opinion; and an evil suspicion hath overthrown their judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_25">25&#160;</span>Without eyes thou shalt want light: profess not the knowledge therefore that thou hast not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_26">26&#160;</span>A stubborn heart shall fare evil <a href='#FN95'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>at the last; and he that loveth danger shall perish therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_27">27&#160;</span>An obstinate heart shall be laden with sorrows; and the wicked man shall <a href='#FN96'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>heap sin upon sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>In the <a href='#FN98'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>punishment of the proud there is no remedy; for the plant of wickedness hath taken root in him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_29">29&#160;</span>The heart of the prudent will understand a parable; and an attentive ear is the desire of a wise man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_30">30&#160;</span>Water will quench a flaming fire; and <a href='#FN99'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>alms maketh an atonement for sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_31">31&#160;</span>And he that requiteth good turns is mindful of that which may come hereafter; and <a href='#FN100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>when he falleth, he shall find a stay.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_1">1&#160;</span>My son, <a href='#FN101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>defraud not the poor of his living, and <a href='#FN102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>make not the needy eyes to wait long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_2">2&#160;</span>Make not an hungry soul sorrowful; neither provoke a man in his distress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>Add not more trouble to an heart that is vexed; and <a href='#FN104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>defer not to give to him that is in need. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_4">4&#160;</span>Reject not the supplication of the afflicted; <a href='#FN105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>neither <a href='#FN106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>turn away thy face from a poor man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Turn not away thine eye from <a href='#FN108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the needy, and give him none occasion <a href='#FN110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>to curse thee: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_6">6&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, <a href='#FN112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>his prayer shall be heard of him that made him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_7">7&#160;</span>Get thyself the love of the congregation, and bow thy head to a great man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_8">8&#160;</span>Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a friendly answer with meekness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Deliver him that suffereth wrong from the hand of the oppressor; and <a href='#FN114'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>be not fainthearted when thou sittest in judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Be as a father unto the fatherless, and instead of an husband unto their mother: so shalt thou be as <a href='#FN116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the son of the most High, and he shall love thee more than thy mother doth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Wisdom exalteth <a href='#FN118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>her children, and layeth hold of them that seek her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>He that loveth her loveth life; and <a href='#FN120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>they that seek to her early shall be filled with <a href='#FN121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_13">13&#160;</span>He that holdeth her fast <a href='#FN122'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shall inherit glory; and wheresoever she entereth, the Lord will bless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_14">14&#160;</span>They that serve her shall minister <a href='#FN123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to the Holy One: and them that love her the Lord doth love. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_15">15&#160;</span>Whoso giveth ear unto her <a href='#FN124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>shall judge the nations: and he that attendeth unto her shall dwell securely. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_16">16&#160;</span>If a man commit himself unto her, he shall inherit her; and his generation shall hold her in possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_17">17&#160;</span>For at the first she will walk with him <a href='#FN125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his soul, and try him by her laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_18">18&#160;</span>Then will she return the straight way unto him, and <a href='#FN126'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>comfort him, and <a href='#FN127'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>shew him her secrets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_19">19&#160;</span>But if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his own ruin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Observe the opportunity, and beware of evil; and <a href='#FN129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>be not ashamed when it concerneth thy soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_21">21&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>there is a shame that bringeth sin; and <a href='#FN131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>there is a shame which is glory and grace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause thee to fall. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_23">23&#160;</span>And refrain not to speak, <a href='#FN133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when there is occasion to do good, and hide not thy wisdom in her beauty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_24">24&#160;</span>For by speech wisdom shall be known: and learning by the word of the tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_25">25&#160;</span>In no wise speak against the truth; but be abashed of the error of thine ignorance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Be not ashamed to confess thy sins; <a href='#FN135'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and force not the course of the river. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_27">27&#160;</span>Make not thyself an underling to a foolish man; neither <a href='#FN136'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>accept the person of the mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_28">28&#160;</span>Strive for the truth unto death, and the Lord shall fight for thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Be not hasty in thy tongue, and in thy deeds slack and remiss. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_30">30&#160;</span>Be not as a lion in thy house, <a href='#FN138'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>nor frantick among thy servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Let not thine hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou shouldest <a href='#FN140'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>repay.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Set thy heart <a href='#FN142'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>upon thy goods; and say not, <a href='#FN143'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>I have enough for my life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Follow not thine own mind and thy strength, to walk in the ways of thy heart: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_3">3&#160;</span>And say not, Who shall controul me for my works? for the Lord will surely revenge thy pride. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Say not, I have sinned, and what harm hath happened unto me? for <a href='#FN146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the Lord is longsuffering, <a href='#FN147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>he will in no wise let thee go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_5">5&#160;</span>Concerning propitiation, be not without fear <a href='#FN148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>to add sin unto sin: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_6">6&#160;</span>And say not His mercy is great; he will be pacified for the multitude of my sins: <a href='#FN149'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>for mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation resteth upon sinners. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN150' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for <a href='#FN151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN152' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Set not thine heart upon <a href='#FN153'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>goods unjustly gotten, for <a href='#FN154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>they shall not profit thee in the day of <a href='#FN155'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>calamity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_9">9&#160;</span>Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way: for <a href='#FN156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>so doth the sinner <a href='#FN157'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>that hath a double tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Be stedfast in thy understanding; and let thy word be <a href='#FN159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the same. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN160' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Be swift to hear; and let thy life be sincere; and <a href='#FN161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>with patience give answer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_12">12&#160;</span>If thou hast understanding, <a href='#FN162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>answer thy neighbour; if not, <a href='#FN163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>lay thy hand upon thy mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN164' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Honour and shame is in talk: and <a href='#FN165'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the tongue of man is his fall. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_14">14&#160;</span>Be not called <a href='#FN166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>a whisperer, and <a href='#FN167'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>lie not in wait with thy tongue: for <a href='#FN168'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>a foul shame is upon the thief, and an evil condemnation upon <a href='#FN169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the double tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_15">15&#160;</span>Be not ignorant of any thing in a great matter or a small.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_1">1&#160;</span>Instead of a friend become not an enemy; for <span class='add'>thereby</span> thou shalt inherit an ill name, shame, and reproach: even so shall a sinner <a href='#FN170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>that hath a double tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Extol not thyself in the counsel of thine own heart; that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a bull <span class='add'>straying alone</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_3">3&#160;</span>Thou shalt eat up thy leaves, and lose thy fruit, and leave thyself as <a href='#FN172'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a dry tree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_4">4&#160;</span>A wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN173' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN174' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Sweet language will multiply friends: and a fairspeaking tongue will increase kind greetings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_6">6&#160;</span>Be in peace with many: nevertheless have but one counsellor of a thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_7">7&#160;</span>If thou wouldest get a friend, <a href='#FN175'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prove him first and be not hasty to credit him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_8">8&#160;</span>For some man is a friend for his own occasion, and <a href='#FN176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>will not abide in the day of thy trouble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_9">9&#160;</span>And there is a friend, who being turned to enmity, and strife will discover thy reproach. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_10">10&#160;</span>Again, <a href='#FN177'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>some friend is a companion at the table, and <a href='#FN178'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>will not continue in the day of thy affliction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_11">11&#160;</span>But in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be bold over thy servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_12">12&#160;</span>If thou be brought low, he will be against thee, and will hide himself from thy face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_13">13&#160;</span>Separate thyself from thine enemies, and <a href='#FN179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>take heed of <a href='#FN180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>thy friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_14">14&#160;</span>A faithfull friend is a strong defence: and he that hath found such an one hath found a treasure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_15">15&#160;</span>Nothing doth <a href='#FN181'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>countervail a faithful friend, and his excellency is invaluable. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_16">16&#160;</span>A faithful friend is the medicine of life; and they that fear the Lord shall find him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_17">17&#160;</span>Whoso feareth the Lord shall direct his friendship aright: for as he is, so shall his neighbour be also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_18">18&#160;</span>My son, gather instruction <a href='#FN182'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>from thy youth up: so shalt thou find wisdom till thine old age. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_19">19&#160;</span>Come unto her as one that ploweth and soweth, and <a href='#FN183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>wait for her good fruits: for <a href='#FN184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>thou shalt not toil much in labouring about her, but thou shalt eat of her fruits right soon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN185' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>She is very unpleasant to the unlearned: he that is without <a href='#FN186'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>understanding will not remain with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_21">21&#160;</span>She will lie upon him as <a href='#FN187'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>a mighty stone of trial; and he will cast her from him ere it be long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_22">22&#160;</span>For wisdom is <a href='#FN188'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>according to her name, and she is not manifest unto many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_23">23&#160;</span>Give ear, my son, receive my advice, and refuse not my counsel, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_24">24&#160;</span>And put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her <a href='#FN189'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>chain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not grieved with her bonds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_26">26&#160;</span>Come unto her <a href='#FN191'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>with thy whole heart, and keep her ways <a href='#FN192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>with all thy power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_27">27&#160;</span>Search, and seek, and she shall be made known unto thee: and when <a href='#FN193'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>thou hast got hold of her, let her not go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_28">28&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN194'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>at the last thou shalt <a href='#FN195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>find her rest, and that shall be turned to thy joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_29">29&#160;</span>Then shall <a href='#FN196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>her fetters be a strong defence for thee, and <a href='#FN197'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>her chains a robe of glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_30">30&#160;</span>For there is a golden ornament upon her, and her bands are <a href='#FN198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>purple lace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_31">31&#160;</span>Thou shalt put her on as a robe of honour, and shalt put her about thee as <a href='#FN199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>a crown of joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_32">32&#160;</span>My son, if thou wilt, thou shalt be taught: and if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be <a href='#FN200'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>prudent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_33">33&#160;</span>If thou love to hear, thou shalt receive understanding: and if thou bow thine ear, thou shalt be wise, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_34">34&#160;</span>Stand in the multitude of the <a href='#FN201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>elders; and cleave unto him that is wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_35">35&#160;</span>Be willing to hear every godly discourse; and let not the <a href='#FN202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>parables of understanding escape thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_36">36&#160;</span>And if thou seest a man of understanding, <a href='#FN203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>get thee betimes unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his door. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_37">37&#160;</span>Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord and <a href='#FN204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>meditate continually in his commandments: <a href='#FN205'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he shall establish thine heart, and give thee wisdom at thine owns desire.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_1">1&#160;</span>Do no evil, <a href='#FN206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>so shall no harm come unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_2">2&#160;</span>Depart from the unjust, and iniquity shall turn away from thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_3">3&#160;</span>My son, <a href='#FN207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>sow not upon the furrows of unrighteousness, and thou shalt not reap them <a href='#FN208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>sevenfold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_4">4&#160;</span>Seek not of the Lord preeminence, neither of the king the seat of honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN209' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>justify not thyself before the Lord; and boast not of thy wisdom before the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_6">6&#160;</span>Seek not to be judge, being not able to take away iniquity; <a href='#FN210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>lest at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, an <a href='#FN211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>stumblingblock in the way of thy uprightness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Offend not against the multitude of a city, and then thou shalt not cast thyself down among the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN213' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Bind not one sin upon another; for in one thou shalt not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Say not, God will look upon the multitude of my oblations, and when I offer to the most high God, he will accept it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN215' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Be not fainthearted when thou makest thy prayer, and <a href='#FN216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>neglect not to give alms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul: for <a href='#FN218'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>there is one which humbleth and exalteth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN219' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Devise not a lie against thy brother; neither do the like to thy friend. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_13">13&#160;</span>Use not to make any manner of lie: for the custom thereof is not good. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN220' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Use not many words in a multitude of elders, and <a href='#FN221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>make not <a href='#FN222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>much babbling when thou prayest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_15">15&#160;</span>Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry, <a href='#FN223'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>which the most High hath <a href='#FN224'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ordained. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_16">16&#160;</span>Number not thyself among the multitude of sinners, but remember that wrath will not tarry long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN225' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>qq</a>Humble thyself greatly: for the vengeance of the ungodly is <a href='#FN226'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>fire and worms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_18">18&#160;</span>Change not a friend <a href='#FN227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>rr</a>for any good by no means; neither a <a href='#FN228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>faithful brother for the gold of <a href='#FN229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Ophir. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN230' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Forego not a wise and good woman: <a href='#FN231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>for her grace is above gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN232' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Whereas thy servant worketh truly, entreat him not evil, nor <a href='#FN233'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the hireling that bestoweth himself wholly for thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN234' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Let thy soul love a <a href='#FN235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>good servant, and <a href='#FN236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>defraud him not of liberty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Hast thou cattle? have an eye to them: and if they be for thy profit, keep them with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_23">23&#160;</span>Hast thou children? <a href='#FN238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>instruct them, and <a href='#FN239'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>bow down their neck from their youth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN240' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Hast thou daughters? have a care of their body, and shew not thyself cheerful toward them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_25">25&#160;</span>Marry thy daughter, and so shalt thou have performed a weighty matter: but give her to a man <a href='#FN241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>of understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_26">26&#160;</span>Hast thou a wife after thy mind? forsake her not: but give not thyself over to a <a href='#FN242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>light woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN243' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Honour thy father with thy whole heart, and <a href='#FN244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>forget not the sorrows of thy mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_28">28&#160;</span>Remember that thou wast begotten of them; and how canst thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_29">29&#160;</span>Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and <a href='#FN245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>reverence his priests. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN246' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Love him that made thee with all thy strength, and <a href='#FN247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>forsake not his ministers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_31">31&#160;</span>Fear the Lord, and honor the priest; and give him his portion, <a href='#FN248'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>as it is commanded thee; <a href='#FN249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the firstfruits, and <a href='#FN250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the trespass offering, and <a href='#FN251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the gift of the shoulders, and <a href='#FN252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the sacrifice of sanctification, and <a href='#FN253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the firstfruits of the holy things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_32">32&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>stretch thine hand unto the poor, that <a href='#FN255'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thy <a href='#FN256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>blessing may be perfected. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_33">33&#160;</span>A gift hath grace in the sight of every man living; and <a href='#FN257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>for the dead detain it not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_34">34&#160;</span><a href='#FN258' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Fail not to be with them that weep, and mourn with them that mourn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_35">35&#160;</span><a href='#FN259' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Be not slow to visit the sick: for that shall make thee to be beloved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_36">36&#160;</span>Whatsoever thou takest in hand, <a href='#FN260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>remember the end, and thou shalt never do amiss.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_1">1&#160;</span>Strive not with a mighty man’ lest thou fall into his hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN261' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Be not at variance with a rich man, lest he overweigh thee: for <a href='#FN262'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>gold hath destroyed many, and perverted the hearts of kings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_3">3&#160;</span>Strive not with a man that is <a href='#FN263'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>full of tongue, and <a href='#FN264'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>heap not wood upon his fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_4">4&#160;</span>Jest not with a rude man, lest thy ancestors be disgraced. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN265' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Reproach not a man that turneth from sin, but remember that we are all worthy of <a href='#FN266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>punishment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN267' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Dishonour not a man in his old age: for even some of us wax old. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_7">7&#160;</span>Rejoice not over thy greatest enemy being dead, but remember that we die all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_8">8&#160;</span>Despise not the discourse of the wise, but acquaint thyself with their proverbs: for of them thou shalt learn instruction, and how to serve great men with ease. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN268' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Miss not the discourse of the elders: for they also learned of their fathers, and of them thou shalt learn understanding, and <a href='#FN269'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>to give answer as need requireth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN270' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Kindle not the coals of a sinner, lest thou be burnt with the flame of his fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_11">11&#160;</span>Rise not up <span class='add'>in anger</span> at the presence of an injurious person, lest he lie in wait <a href='#FN271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>to entrap thee <a href='#FN272'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in thy words </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN273' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Lend not unto him that is mightier than thyself; for if thou lendest him, count it but lost. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_13">13&#160;</span>Be not surety above thy power: for <a href='#FN274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>if thou be surety, take care to pay it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_14">14&#160;</span>Go not to law with a judge; for they will judge for him according to his <a href='#FN275'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN276' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Travel not by the way with a bold fellow, lest he become grievous unto thee: for he will do according to his own will, and thou shalt perish with him through his folly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN277' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Strive not with an angry man, and go not with him into a solitary place: for blood is as nothing in his sight, and where there is no help, he will overthrow thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Consult not with a fool; for <a href='#FN279'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>he cannot keep counsel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_18">18&#160;</span>Do no secret thing before a stranger; for thou knowest not what he will bring forth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_19">19&#160;</span>Open not thine heart to every man, lest he requite thee with a shrewd turn.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_1">1&#160;</span>Be not jealous over <a href='#FN280'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the wife of thy bosom, and teach her not an evil lesson against thyself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_2">2&#160;</span>Give not thy soul unto a woman to set her foot upon thy <a href='#FN281'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>substance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Meet not with an harlot, lest thou fall into her snares. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_4">4&#160;</span>Use not much the company of a woman that <a href='#FN283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>is a singer, lest thou be taken with her attempts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Gaze not on a maid, <a href='#FN285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>that thou fall not by <a href='#FN286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>those things that are precious in her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_6">6&#160;</span>Give not thy soul unto harlots, that thou lose not thine inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_7">7&#160;</span>Look not round about thee in the streets of the city, neither wander thou in the solitary place thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_8">8&#160;</span>Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look not upon another’s beauty; for <a href='#FN287'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>many have been <a href='#FN288'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>deceived by the beauty of a woman; for herewith <a href='#FN289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>love is kindled as a fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_9">9&#160;</span>Sit not at all with <a href='#FN290'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>another man’s wife, nor sit down with her in thine arms, and spend not thy money with her at the wine; lest thine heart incline unto her, and so through thy desire thou fall into destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_10">10&#160;</span>Forsake not an old friend; for the new is not comparable to him: a new friend is as new wine; <a href='#FN291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>when it is old, thou shalt drink it with pleasure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN292' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Envy not the glory of a sinner: for thou knowest not what shall be his <a href='#FN293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Delight not in the thing that the ungodly have pleasure in; but remember they shall not go unpunished unto their grave. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_13">13&#160;</span>Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill; so shalt thou not doubt the fear of death: and if thou come unto him, make no fault, lest he take away thy life presently: remember that thou goest in the midst of snares, and that thou walkest upon the battlements of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_14">14&#160;</span>As near as thou canst, guess at thy neighbour, and <a href='#FN295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>consult with the wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_15">15&#160;</span>Let thy talk be with the wise, and <a href='#FN296'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>all thy communication in the law of the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_16">16&#160;</span>And let just men eat and drink with thee; and let thy glorying be in the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_17">17&#160;</span>For the hand of the artificer the work shall be commended: and the wise ruler of the people for his speech. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_18">18&#160;</span>A man <a href='#FN297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>of an ill tongue is dangerous in his city; and he that is rash in his talk shall be hated.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_1">1&#160;</span>A wise judge will instruct his people; and the government of a prudent man is well ordered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>As the judge of the people is himself, so are his officers; and what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are all they that dwell therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_3">3&#160;</span>An unwise king destroyeth his people; but through the prudence of them which are in authority the city shall be inhabited. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN299' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>The power of the earth is in the hand of the Lord, and in due time he will set over it one that is profitable. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_5">5&#160;</span>In the hand of God is the <a href='#FN300'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>prosperity of man: and upon the <a href='#FN301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>person of <a href='#FN302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the scribe shall he lay his honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN303' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Bear not hatred to thy neighbour for every wrong; and do nothing at all by injurious practices. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_7">7&#160;</span>Pride is hateful before God and man: and by both doth one commit iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_8">8&#160;</span>Because of unrighteous dealings, injuries, and riches got by deceit, <a href='#FN304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the kingdom is translated from one people to another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_9">9&#160;</span>Why is <a href='#FN305'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>earth and ashes proud? There is not a more wicked thing than a covetous man: for such an one setteth his own soul to sale; because while he liveth <a href='#FN306'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>he casteth away his bowels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_10">10&#160;</span>The physician cutteth off a long disease; and <a href='#FN307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>he that is to day a king to morrow shall die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_11">11&#160;</span>For when a man is dead, he shall inherit creeping things, beasts, and <a href='#FN308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a><a href='#FN309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>worms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_12">12&#160;</span>The beginning of pride is when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_13">13&#160;</span>For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that hath it shall <a href='#FN310'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>pour out abomination: and therefore the Lord brought upon them strange <a href='#FN311'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>calamities, and overthrew them utterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN312' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>The Lord hath cast down the thrones of proud princes, and set up the meek in their stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_15">15&#160;</span>The Lord hath plucked up the roots of the proud nations, and planted the lowly in their place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_16">16&#160;</span>The Lord overthrew countries of the heathen, and destroyed them to the foundations of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_17">17&#160;</span>He took some of them away, and destroyed them, and <a href='#FN313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>hath made their memorial to cease from the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_18">18&#160;</span>Pride was not <a href='#FN314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>made for men, nor furious anger for <a href='#FN315'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>them that are born of a woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_19">19&#160;</span>They that fear the Lord are a sure seed, and they that love him an honourable plant: they that regard not the law are a dishonourable seed; they that transgress the commandments are a <a href='#FN316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>deceivable seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_20">20&#160;</span>Among brethren he that is chief is honorable; so are they that fear the Lord in his eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_21">21&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord goeth before the obtaining of <a href='#FN317'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>authority: but roughness and pride is the losing thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_22">22&#160;</span>Whether he be rich, noble, or poor, <a href='#FN318'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>their glory is the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_23">23&#160;</span>It is not meet to despise the poor man <a href='#FN319'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>that hath understanding; neither <a href='#FN320'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>is it convenient to magnify a sinful man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_24">24&#160;</span>Great men, and judges, and potentates, shall be honoured; yet is there none of them greater than he that feareth the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Unto the servant that is wise shall they that are free do service: and <a href='#FN322'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>he that hath knowledge will not grudge when he is reformed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_26">26&#160;</span>Be not overwise in doing thy business; and boast not thyself in the time of thy distress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Better is he that laboureth, and aboundeth in all things, than he that boasteth himself, and wanteth bread. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_28">28&#160;</span>My son, <a href='#FN324'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>glorify thy soul in meekness, and give it honour according to the dignity thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_29">29&#160;</span>Who will justify him that sinneth against his own soul? and who will honour him that dishonoureth his own life? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN325' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>The poor man is honoured for his skill, and the rich man is honoured for his riches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_31">31&#160;</span>He that is honoured in poverty, how much more in riches? and he that is dishonourable in riches, how much more in poverty?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_1">1&#160;</span>Wisdom lifteth up the head <a href='#FN326'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of him that is of low degree, and <a href='#FN327'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>maketh him to sit among great men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_2">2&#160;</span>Commend not a man for his beauty; neither abhor a man for his outward appearance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_3">3&#160;</span>The bee is little among such as fly; but her fruit is <a href='#FN328'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the chief of sweet things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN329' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Boast not of thy clothing and raiment, and exalt not thyself in the day of honour: for <a href='#FN330'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the works of the Lord are wonderful, and his works among men are hidden. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_5">5&#160;</span>Many <a href='#FN331'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kings have <a href='#FN332'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>sat down upon the ground; and one that was never thought of hath worn the crown. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN333' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Many mighty men have been greatly disgraced; and the honourable delivered into other men’s hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN334' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Blame not before thou hast examined the truth: understand first, and then rebuke. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN335' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Answer not before thou hast heard the cause: neither interrupt men in the midst of their talk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_9">9&#160;</span>Strive not in a matter that concerneth thee not; and sit not <a href='#FN336'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in judgment with sinners. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_10">10&#160;</span>My son, meddle not with many matters: for if thou meddle much, thou shalt not be innocent; and if thou <a href='#FN337'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>follow after, thou shalt not <a href='#FN338'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>obtain, neither shalt thou <a href='#FN339'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>escape by fleeing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>There is one that laboureth, and taketh pains, and maketh haste, and is so much the more behind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_12">12&#160;</span>Again, there is another that is slow, and hath need of help, wanting <a href='#FN341'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>ability, and full of poverty; <a href='#FN342'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>yet the eye of the Lord looked upon him for good, and set him up from his low estate, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_13">13&#160;</span>And lifted up his head from misery; so that many that saw it marvelled at him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of the law, are of the Lord: love, and the way of good works, are from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_16">16&#160;</span>Error and darkness <a href='#FN345'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>had their beginning together with sinners: and evil shall wax old with them that glory therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_17">17&#160;</span>The gift of the Lord remaineth with the ungodly, and his favour bringeth prosperity for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_18">18&#160;</span>There is that waxeth rich by his wariness and pinching, and this is the portion of his reward: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN346' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Whereas he saith, I have found rest, and now will eat <a href='#FN347'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>continually of my goods; and yet he knoweth not what time shall <a href='#FN348'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>come upon him, and that <a href='#FN349'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>he must leave those things to others, and die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Be stedfast in thy covenant, and be conversant therein, and wax old in thy work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN351' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Marvel not at the works of sinners; but trust in the Lord, and abide in thy labour: for it is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord on the sudden to make a poor man rich. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_22">22&#160;</span>The blessing of the Lord is <a href='#FN352'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the reward of the godly, and suddenly he maketh his blessing flourish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_23">23&#160;</span>Say not, <a href='#FN353'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>What profit is there of my service? and what good things shall I have hereafter? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_24">24&#160;</span>Again, <a href='#FN354'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>say not, I have enough, and possess many things, and what evil shall I have hereafter? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN355' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>In the day of prosperity there is a forgetfulness of affliction: and in the day of affliction there is no more remembrance of prosperity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_26">26&#160;</span>For it is an easy thing unto the Lord <a href='#FN356'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>in the day of death to reward a man according to his ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_27">27&#160;</span>The affliction of an hour maketh a man forget pleasure: and in his end his deeds shall be discovered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Judge none blessed before his death: for a man shall be known in his children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_29">29&#160;</span>Bring not every man into thine house: for the deceitful man hath many trains. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_30">30&#160;</span>Like as a partridge taken <span class='add'>and kept</span> in a cage, so is the heart of the proud; and like as a spy, watcheth he for thy fall: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_31">31&#160;</span>For he lieth in wait, and turneth good into evil, and in things worthy praise will lay blame upon thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_32">32&#160;</span>Of a spark of fire <a href='#FN358'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>a heap of coals is kindled: and a sinful man layeth wait for blood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_33">33&#160;</span>Take heed of a mischievous man, for he worketh wickedness; lest he bring upon thee a perpetual blot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_34">34&#160;</span>Receive a stranger into thine house, and he will disturb thee, and turn thee out of <a href='#FN359'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>thine own.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_1">1&#160;</span>When thou wilt do good <a href='#FN360'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>know to whom thou doest it; so shalt thou be thanked for thy benefits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_2">2&#160;</span>Do good to the godly man, and thou shalt find a recompence; and <a href='#FN361'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>if not from him, yet from the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_3">3&#160;</span>There can no good come to him that is always occupied in evil, nor <a href='#FN362'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>to him that giveth no alms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN363' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Give to the godly man, <a href='#FN364'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a><a href='#FN365'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>and help not a sinner. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_5">5&#160;</span>Do well unto him that is lowly, but <a href='#FN366'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>give not to the ungodly: hold back thy bread, and give it not unto him, lest he overmaster thee thereby: for <span class='add'>else</span> <a href='#FN367'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>thou shalt receive twice as much evil for all the good thou shalt have done unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_6">6&#160;</span>For the most High hateth sinners, and will repay vengeance unto the ungodly, and <a href='#FN368'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>keepeth them against the mighty day of their punishment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN369' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Give unto the good, <a href='#FN370'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a><a href='#FN371'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>and help not the sinner. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_8">8&#160;</span>A friend cannot be known in prosperity: and an enemy cannot be hidden in adversity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_9">9&#160;</span>In the prosperity of a man enemies will be grieved: but in his adversity even a friend will depart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_10">10&#160;</span>Never trust thine enemy: for like as <a href='#FN372'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>iron rusteth, so is his wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN373' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Though he humble himself, and go <a href='#FN374'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>crouching, yet take good heed and beware of him, and thou shalt be unto him as if thou hadst <a href='#FN375'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>wiped a <a href='#FN376'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>lookingglass, and thou shalt know that <a href='#FN377'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a><a href='#FN378'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>his rust hath not been altogether wiped away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_12">12&#160;</span>Set him not by thee, lest, when he hath overthrown thee, he stand up in thy place; neither let him sit at thy right hand, lest he seek to take thy seat, and thou <a href='#FN379'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>at the last remember my words, and <a href='#FN380'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>be pricked therewith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_13">13&#160;</span>Who will pity <a href='#FN381'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a charmer that is bitten with a serpent, or any such as come nigh wild beasts? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_14">14&#160;</span>So one that goeth to a sinner, and is <a href='#FN382'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>defiled with him in his sins, who will pity? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_15">15&#160;</span>For a while he will abide with thee, but if thou begin to fall, he will not <a href='#FN383'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>tarry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN384' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>An enemy speaketh sweetly with his lips, but in his heart <a href='#FN385'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>he imagineth how to throw thee into a pit: <a href='#FN386'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>he will weep with his eyes, but if he find opportunity, he will not be satisfied with blood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_17">17&#160;</span>If adversity come upon thee, thou shalt find him there first; and though he pretend to help thee, yet shall he <a href='#FN387'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>undermine thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_18">18&#160;</span>He will <a href='#FN388'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shake his head, and <a href='#FN389'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>clap his hands, and whisper much, and <a href='#FN390'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>change his countenance.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_1">1&#160;</span>He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith; and <a href='#FN391'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>he that hath fellowship with a proud man shall be like unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_2">2&#160;</span>Burden not thyself above thy power while thou livest; and have no fellowship with one that is mightier and richer than thyself: for how agree the kettle and the earthen pot together? <a href='#FN392'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for if the one be smitten against the other, it shall be broken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN393' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he threateneth withal: the poor is wronged, and he must intreat also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_4">4&#160;</span>If thou be for his profit, he will use thee: but if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_5">5&#160;</span>If thou have any thing, he will live with thee: yea, he will <a href='#FN394'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>make thee bare, and will not be sorry for it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_6">6&#160;</span>If he have need of thee, he will deceive thee, and smile upon thee, and put thee in hope; he will speak thee fair, and say, What wantest thou? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_7">7&#160;</span>And he will shame thee by his meats, until he have <a href='#FN395'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>drawn thee dry twice or thrice, and at the last he will laugh thee to scorn afterward, when he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and <a href='#FN396'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>shake his head at thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_8">8&#160;</span>Beware that thou be not deceived and brought down <a href='#FN397'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in thy <a href='#FN398'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>jollity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_9">9&#160;</span>If thou be invited of a mighty man, withdraw thyself, and so much the more will he invite thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN399' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Press thou not upon him, lest thou be put back; stand not far off, lest thou be forgotten. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN400' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN401' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Affect not to be made equal unto him in talk, <a href='#FN402'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and believe not his many words: for with much communication will he tempt thee, and smiling upon thee will get out thy secrets: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_12">12&#160;</span>But cruelly he will lay up thy words, and will not spare to do thee hurt, and to put thee in prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_13">13&#160;</span>Observe, and take good heed, for thou walkest in peril of thy overthrowing: when thou hearest these things, awake in thy sleep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_14">14&#160;</span>Love the Lord all thy life, and call upon him for thy salvation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_15">15&#160;</span>Every beast loveth his like, and every man loveth his neighbor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_16">16&#160;</span>All flesh consorteth according to kind, and a man will cleave to his like. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN403' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>What fellowship hath the wolf with the lamb? <a href='#FN404'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>so the sinner with the godly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_18">18&#160;</span>What agreement is there between the hyena and a dog? and what peace between the rich and the poor? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_19">19&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN405'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the wild ass is the lion’s prey in the wilderness: so <a href='#FN406'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the rich eat up the poor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_20">20&#160;</span>As the proud hate humility: so doth the rich abhor the poor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_21">21&#160;</span>A rich man beginning to fall is held up of his friends: but a poor man being down is thrust away by his friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_22">22&#160;</span>When a rich man is fallen, he hath many helpers: he speaketh things not to be spoken, and yet men justify him: the poor man slipped, and yet they rebuked him too; <a href='#FN407'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>he spake wisely, and <a href='#FN408'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>could have no place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_23">23&#160;</span>When a rich man speaketh, <a href='#FN409'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>every man holdeth his tongue, and, look, what he saith, they extol it to the clouds: but if the poor man speak, they say, What fellow is this? and if he stumble, they will help to overthrow him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_24">24&#160;</span>Riches are good unto him that hath no sin, and poverty is evil in the mouth of the ungodly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_25">25&#160;</span>The heart of a man <a href='#FN410'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>changeth his countenance, whether it be for good or evil: and <a href='#FN411'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_26">26&#160;</span>A cheerful countenance is a token of a heart that is in prosperity; and the finding out of parables is <a href='#FN412'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>a wearisome labour of the mind.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Blessed is the man that hath not <a href='#FN414'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a><a href='#FN415'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>slipped with his mouth, and is not <a href='#FN416'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>pricked with the <a href='#FN417'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>multitude of sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Blessed is he whose conscience hath not condemned him, and who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_3">3&#160;</span>Riches are not comely for a niggard: and what should an envious man do with money? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_4">4&#160;</span>He that gathereth by defrauding his own soul <a href='#FN419'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>gathereth for others, that shall spend his goods riotously. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_5">5&#160;</span>He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? he shall not take pleasure in his goods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_6">6&#160;</span>There is none worse than he that envieth himself; and this is a recompence of his wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_7">7&#160;</span>And if he doeth good, he doeth it unwillingly; and <a href='#FN420'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>at the last he will declare his wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_8">8&#160;</span>The envious man hath a wicked eye; he turneth away his face, and despiseth men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_9">9&#160;</span>A covetous man’s eye <a href='#FN421'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>is not satisfied with his <a href='#FN422'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>portion; and the iniquity of the wicked drieth up his soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN423' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>A wicked eye <a href='#FN424'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>envieth <span class='add'>his</span> bread, and he is a niggard at his table. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_11">11&#160;</span>My son, according to thy ability do good to thyself, and <a href='#FN425'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>give the Lord his due offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_12">12&#160;</span>Remember that death will not be long in coming, and that the covenant of the grave is not shewed unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN426' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Do good unto thy friend before thou die, and according to thy <a href='#FN427'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>ability stretch out <a href='#FN428'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>thy hand and give to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Defraud not thyself of <a href='#FN430'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the good day, and let not the <a href='#FN431'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>part of a good desire overpass thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN432' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Shalt thou not leave thy travails unto another? and thy labours to be divided by lot? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_16">16&#160;</span>Give, and take, and sanctify thy soul; for there is no seeking of dainties in the grave. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_17">17&#160;</span>All flesh <a href='#FN433'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>waxeth old as a garment: for the covenant from the beginning is, <a href='#FN434'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Thou shalt die the death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_18">18&#160;</span>As of the green leaves on a thick tree, some fall, and some grow; so is the generation of <a href='#FN435'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>flesh and blood, <a href='#FN436'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>one cometh to an end, and another is born. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_19">19&#160;</span>Every work rotteth and consumeth away, and the worker thereof shall go withal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN437' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Blessed is the man that doth meditate good things in wisdom, and that reasoneth of holy things by his understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>He that considereth her ways in his heart shall also have understanding in her secrets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_22">22&#160;</span>Go after her as one that traceth, and lie in wait in her ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_23">23&#160;</span>He that <a href='#FN439'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>prieth in at her windows <a href='#FN440'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>shall also hearken at her doors. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_24">24&#160;</span>He that doth lodge near her house shall also fasten a <a href='#FN441'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN442'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>pin in her walls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_25">25&#160;</span>He shall pitch his tent nigh unto her, and <a href='#FN443'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>shall lodge in a lodging where good things are. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_26">26&#160;</span>He shall set his children under her shelter, and shall lodge under her branches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_27">27&#160;</span>By her he shall be <a href='#FN444'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>covered from heat, and in her glory shall he dwell.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_1">1&#160;</span>He that feareth the Lord will do good, and he that hath the knowledge of the law shall obtain her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_2">2&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN445'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>as a mother shall she meet him, and receive him as a wife married of a virgin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN446' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>With the bread of understanding shall she feed him, and <a href='#FN447'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a><a href='#FN448'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>give him the water of wisdom to drink. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_4">4&#160;</span>He shall be stayed upon her, and shall not be moved; and shall rely upon her, and shall not be confounded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_5">5&#160;</span>She shall exalt him above his neighbours, and in the midst of the congregation shall she open his mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_6">6&#160;</span>He shall find <a href='#FN449'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>joy and a crown of gladness, and she shall cause him to inherit an everlasting name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_7">7&#160;</span>But foolish men shall not attain unto her, and sinners shall not see her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_8">8&#160;</span>For she is far from pride, and men that are liars cannot remember her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN450' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, for <a href='#FN451'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it was not sent him of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_10">10&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN452'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN453'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>praise shall be uttered in wisdom, and the Lord will prosper it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN454' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Say not thou, It is through the Lord that I fell away: for thou oughtest not to do the things that he hateth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN455' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Say not thou, He hath caused me to err: for he hath no need of the sinful man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_13">13&#160;</span>The Lord hateth all abomination; and they that fear God love it not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>He himself made man from the beginning, and <a href='#FN457'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>left him in the hand of his counsel; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN458' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>If thou wilt, to keep the commandments, and to perform acceptable faithfulness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>He hath set fire and water before thee: stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou wilt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN460' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Before man is life and death; and whether him liketh shall be given him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_18">18&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN461'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the wisdom of the Lord is great, and he is mighty in power, and beholdeth all things: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_19">19&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN462'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>his eyes are upon them that fear him, and <a href='#FN463'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>he knoweth every work of man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>He hath commanded no man to do wickedly, neither hath he given any man licence to sin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_1">1&#160;</span>Desire not a multitude of <a href='#FN465'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>unprofitable children, neither delight in ungodly sons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_2">2&#160;</span>Though they multiply, rejoice not in them, except the fear of the Lord be with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_3">3&#160;</span>Trust not thou in their life, neither respect their multitude: for one that is just is better than a thousand; and better it is to die without children, than to have them that are ungodly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_4">4&#160;</span>For by one that hath understanding shall the city be replenished: but the <a href='#FN466'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kindred of the wicked shall speedily become desolate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_5">5&#160;</span>Many such things have I seen with mine eyes, and mine ear hath heard greater things than these. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN467' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>In the congregation of the ungodly shall a fire be kindled; and in a rebellious nation wrath <a href='#FN468'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>is set on fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN469' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>He was not pacified toward the old giants, who fell away in the strength of their foolishness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN470' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Neither spared he the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred them for their <a href='#FN471'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>pride. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>He pitied not the people of perdition, who were taken away in their sins: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN473' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Nor <a href='#FN474'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the six hundred thousand footmen, who were gathered together in the hardness of their hearts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_11">11&#160;</span>And if there be one stiffnecked among the people, it is marvel if he escape unpunished: <a href='#FN475'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>for mercy and wrath are with him; he is mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_12">12&#160;</span>As his mercy is great, so is his correction also: <a href='#FN476'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>he judgeth a man according to his works </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN477' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>The sinner shall not escape with his spoils: and the patience of the godly shall not be frustrate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_14">14&#160;</span>Make way for every work of mercy: for <a href='#FN478'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>every man shall find according to his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>The Lord hardened Pharaoh, that he should not know him, that his powerful works might be known to the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_16">16&#160;</span>His mercy is manifest to every creature; and <a href='#FN480'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>he hath separated his light from the darkness with an <a href='#FN481'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN482'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>adamant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_17">17&#160;</span>Say not thou, <a href='#FN483'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>I will hide myself from the Lord: shall any remember me from above? I shall not be remembered among so many people: for what is my soul among such an infinite number of creatures? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, <a href='#FN484'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, the deep, and the earth, and all that therein is, <a href='#FN485'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>shall be moved <a href='#FN486'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>when he shall visit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN487' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>The mountains also and <a href='#FN488'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>foundations of the earth be shaken with trembling, when the Lord looketh upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_20">20&#160;</span>No heart can think upon these things worthily: and <a href='#FN489'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>who is able to conceive his ways? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_21">21&#160;</span>It is a tempest which no man can see: for <a href='#FN490'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the most part of his works are hid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_22">22&#160;</span>Who can declare the works of his justice? or who can endure them? for his covenant is afar off, and the trial of all things is in the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN491' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>He that wanteth understanding will think upon vain things: and a foolish man erring imagineth follies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>My son, hearken unto me, and learn knowledge, and mark my words with thy heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_25">25&#160;</span>I will shew forth doctrine <a href='#FN493'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>in weight, and declare his knowledge <a href='#FN494'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>exactly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN495' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>The works of the Lord are done in judgment from the beginning: and from the time he made them he disposed the parts thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN496' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>He garnished his works for ever, and in his hand are the <a href='#FN497'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>chief of them unto all generations: they neither labour, nor are weary, nor cease from their works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_28">28&#160;</span>None of them hindereth another, and <a href='#FN498'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>they shall never disobey his word. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>After this the Lord looked upon the earth, and filled it with his blessings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>With all manner of living things hath he covered the face thereof; and <a href='#FN501'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>they shall return into it again.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_1">1&#160;</span>The Lord <a href='#FN502'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>created man of the earth, and <a href='#FN503'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>turned him into it again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN504' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>He gave them <a href='#FN505'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>few days, and a short time, and power also over the things therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_3">3&#160;</span>He endued them with strength by themselves, and <a href='#FN506'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>made them according to his image, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_4">4&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN507'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>put the fear <a href='#FN508'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of man upon all flesh, and <a href='#FN509'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>gave him dominion over beasts and fowls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_5">5&#160;</span>They received the use of the five <a href='#FN510'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>operations of the Lord, and in the sixth place he imparted them understanding, and in the seventh speech, an interpreter of the <a href='#FN511'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>cogitations thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_6">6&#160;</span>Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, ears, and a heart, gave he them to understand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_7">7&#160;</span>Withal he filled them with the knowledge of understanding, and shewed them good and evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_8">8&#160;</span>He set his eye upon their hearts, that he might shew them <a href='#FN512'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the greatness of his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_9">9&#160;</span>He gave them to glory in his marvellous acts for ever, that they might declare his works with understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_10">10&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN513'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the elect shall praise his holy name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_11">11&#160;</span>Beside this he gave them knowledge, and the law of life for an heritage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_12">12&#160;</span>He made an everlasting covenant with them, and shewed them his judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_13">13&#160;</span>Their eyes saw <a href='#FN514'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the majesty of his glory, and their ears heard his glorious voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_14">14&#160;</span>And he said unto them, Beware of all unrighteousness; and <a href='#FN515'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>he gave every man commandment concerning his neighbour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN516' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Their ways are ever before him, and shall not be hid from his eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN517' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>Every man from his youth is given to evil; neither could they make to themselves <a href='#FN518'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>fleshy hearts for stony. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_17">17&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN519'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>in the division of the nations of the whole earth <a href='#FN520'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>he set a ruler over every people; but <a href='#FN521'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Israel is the Lord’s portion: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_18">18&#160;</span>Whom, <a href='#FN522'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>being his firstborn, he nourisheth with discipline, and giving him the light of his love doth not forsake him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore all their works are as the sun before him, and <a href='#FN523'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>his eyes are continually upon their ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_20">20&#160;</span>None of their unrighteous deeds are hid from him, but all their sins are before the Lord </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_21">21&#160;</span>But the Lord being gracious and knowing his workmanship, <a href='#FN524'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>neither left nor forsook them, but spared them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN525' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>The alms of a man is as <a href='#FN526'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>a signet with him, and he will keep the good deeds of man as <a href='#FN527'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the apple of the eye, and give repentance to his sons and daughters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN528' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Afterwards he will rise up and reward them, and <a href='#FN529'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>render their recompence upon their heads. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_24">24&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN530'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>unto them that repent, he granted them return, and comforted those that failed in patience. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN531' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Return unto the Lord, and forsake thy sins, make thy prayer before his face, and <a href='#FN532'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN533'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>offend less. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_26">26&#160;</span>Turn again to the most High, and turn away from iniquity: for he will lead thee out of darkness into the <a href='#FN534'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>light of health, and hate thou abomination vehemently. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN535' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Who shall praise the most High in the grave, instead of them which live and give thanks? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_28">28&#160;</span>Thanksgiving perisheth from the dead, as from one that is not: <a href='#FN536'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the living and sound in heart shall praise the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_29">29&#160;</span>How great is the lovingkindness of the Lord our God, and his compassion unto such as turn unto him in holiness! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_30">30&#160;</span>For all things cannot be in men, because the son of man is not immortal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN537' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>What is brighter than the sun? yet the light thereof faileth; and flesh and blood will imagine evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_32">32&#160;</span>He vieweth the power of the height of heaven; and all men are but <a href='#FN538'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>earth and ashes.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_1">1&#160;</span>He that liveth for ever <a href='#FN539'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Hath created all things in general. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_2">2&#160;</span>The Lord only is righteous, and <a href='#FN540'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>there is none other but he, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_3">3&#160;</span>Who governeth the world <a href='#FN541'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>with the palm of his hand, and <a href='#FN542'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>all things obey his will: for he is the King of all, by his power <a href='#FN543'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>dividing holy things among them from profane. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN544' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>To whom hath he given power to declare his works? and <a href='#FN545'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>who shall find out his <a href='#FN546'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>noble acts? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_5">5&#160;</span>Who shall number the strength of his <a href='#FN547'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>majesty? and who shall also tell out his <a href='#FN548'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>mercies? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_6">6&#160;</span>As for the wondrous works of the Lord, <a href='#FN549'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>there may nothing be taken from them, neither may any thing be put unto them, neither can the ground of them be found out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_7">7&#160;</span>When a man hath done, then he beginneth; and when he leaveth off, then he shall be <a href='#FN550'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>doubtful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_8">8&#160;</span>What is man, and whereto serveth he? what is his good, and what is his evil? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN551' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>The number of a man’s days at the most are an hundred years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN552' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>As a drop of water unto the sea, and a gravelstone in comparison of the sand; so are <a href='#FN553'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a thousand years to the days of eternity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore is God <a href='#FN554'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>patient with them, and poureth forth his mercy upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_12">12&#160;</span>He saw and perceived their <a href='#FN555'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>end to be evil; <a href='#FN556'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>therefore he multiplied his compassion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_13">13&#160;</span>The mercy of man is toward his neighbour; but <a href='#FN557'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh: he reproveth, and nurtureth, and teacheth and bringeth again, <a href='#FN558'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>as a shepherd his flock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_14">14&#160;</span>He hath mercy on them that receive discipline, and that diligently seek after his judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN559' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>My son, blemish not thy good deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when thou givest any thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_16">16&#160;</span>Shall not the <a href='#FN560'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>dew asswage the heat? so is a word better than a gift. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_17">17&#160;</span>Lo, is not a word better than a gift? but both are with a <a href='#FN561'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>gracious man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_18">18&#160;</span>A fool will upbraid churlishly, and <a href='#FN562'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>a gift of the envious consumeth the eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_19">19&#160;</span>Learn before thou speak, and use physick or ever thou be sick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN563' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Before judgment examine thyself, and in the day of <a href='#FN564'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>visitation thou shalt find mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN565' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Humble thyself before thou be sick, and in the time of sins shew repentance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN566' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy vow in due time, and defer not until death to be justified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN567' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Before thou prayest, prepare thyself; and be not as one that tempteth the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN568' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Think upon the wrath <a href='#FN569'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>that shall be at the end, and the time of vengeance, when he shall turn away his face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN570' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>When thou hast enough, remember the time of hunger: and when thou art rich, think upon poverty and need. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_26">26&#160;</span>From the morning until the evening the time is changed, and all things are soon done before the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN571' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>A wise man will fear in every thing, and in the day of sinning he will beware of offence: but a fool will not observe time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_28">28&#160;</span>Every man of understanding knoweth wisdom, and will give praise unto him that found her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_29">29&#160;</span>They that were of understanding in sayings became also wise themselves, and <a href='#FN572'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>poured forth <a href='#FN573'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>exquisite parables. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN574' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine <a href='#FN575'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>appetites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_31">31&#160;</span>If thou givest thy soul the desires that please her, she will make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies that malign thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_32">32&#160;</span>Take not pleasure in much good cheer, neither be tied to the expence thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_33">33&#160;</span>Be not made a beggar by banqueting upon borrowing, when thou hast nothing in thy purse: for thou shalt lie in wait for thine own life, and be talked on.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN576' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>A labouring man that is given to drunkenness shall not be rich: and <a href='#FN577'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>he that contemneth small things shall fall by little and little. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN578' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Wine and <a href='#FN579'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a><a href='#FN580'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>women will make men of understanding to fall away: and <a href='#FN581'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he that cleaveth to harlots will become impudent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN582' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Moths and worms shall have him to heritage, and a bold man shall be taken away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN583' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>He that is hasty to give credit is lightminded; and <a href='#FN584'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>he that sinneth shall offend against his own soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_5">5&#160;</span>Whoso taketh pleasure in wickedness shall be condemned: but he that <a href='#FN585'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>resisteth pleasures crowneth his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_6">6&#160;</span>He that can rule his tongue shall live without strife; and he that hateth babbling shall have less evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN586' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Rehearse not unto another that which is told unto thee, and thou shalt fare never the worse. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_8">8&#160;</span>Whether it be <a href='#FN587'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to friend or foe, talk not of other men’s lives; and if thou canst without offence, reveal them not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_9">9&#160;</span>For he heard and <a href='#FN588'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>observed thee, and when time cometh he will <a href='#FN589'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hate thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_10">10&#160;</span>If thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee; and be bold, <a href='#FN590'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>it will not burst thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_11">11&#160;</span>A fool travaileth with a word, as a woman in labour of a child. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_12">12&#160;</span>As an arrow that sticketh in a man’s thigh, so is a word within a fool’s <a href='#FN591'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>belly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN592' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Admonish a friend, it may be he hath not done it: and if he have done it, that he do it no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN593' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Admonish thy friend, it may be he hath not said it: and if he have, that he <a href='#FN594'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>speak it not again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_15">15&#160;</span>Admonish a friend: for many times it is a slander, and believe not every tale. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN595' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>There is one that slippeth in his speech, but not <a href='#FN596'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from his heart; and who is he that hath not offended with his tongue? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN597' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Admonish thy neighbour before thou threaten him; and not being angry, <a href='#FN598'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>give place to the law of the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN599' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>The fear of the Lord is the first step <a href='#FN600'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN601'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>to be accepted <span class='add'>of him</span>, and wisdom obtaineth his love. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_19">19&#160;</span>The knowledge of the commandments of the Lord is the doctrine of life: and they that do things that please him shall <a href='#FN602'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>receive the fruit of the tree of immortality. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_20">20&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is all wisdom; and in all wisdom is the performance of the law, and the knowledge of his omnipotency. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN603' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>If a servant say to his master, I will not do as it pleaseth thee; though afterward he do it, he angereth him that nourisheth him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_22">22&#160;</span>The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom, neither at any time the counsel of sinners prudence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_23">23&#160;</span>There is a wickedness, and the same an abomination; and there is a fool wanting in wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_24">24&#160;</span>He that hath small understanding, and feareth God, is better than one that hath much wisdom, and transgresseth the law of the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_25">25&#160;</span>There is an exquisite subtilty, and the same is unjust; and there is one that turneth aside to make judgment appear; and there is a wise man that <a href='#FN604'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>justifieth in judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_26">26&#160;</span>There is a wicked man that <a href='#FN605'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>hangeth down his head <a href='#FN606'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sadly; but inwardly he is full of deceit, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN607' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Casting down his countenance, and making as if he heard not: where he is not known, he will do thee a mischief before thou be aware. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_28">28&#160;</span>And if for want of power he be hindered from sinning, yet when he findeth opportunity he will do evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_29">29&#160;</span>A man may be known by his look, and one that hath understanding by his countenance, when thou meetest him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_30">30&#160;</span>A man’s attire, and <a href='#FN608'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>excessive laughter, and gait, shew what he is.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN609' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>There is a reproof that is not <a href='#FN610'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>comely: again, <a href='#FN611'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>some man holdeth his tongue, and he is wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_2">2&#160;</span>It is much better to reprove, than to be angry secretly: and <a href='#FN612'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>he that confesseth his fault shall be preserved from hurt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_3">3&#160;</span>How good is it, when thou art reproved, to shew repentance! for so shalt thou escape <a href='#FN613'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>wilful sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_4">4&#160;</span>As is <a href='#FN614'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the lust of an eunuch to deflower a virgin; so is he that executeth judgment with violence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN615' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>There is one that keepeth silence, and is found wise: and another by much babbling becometh hateful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_6">6&#160;</span>Some man holdeth his tongue, because he hath not to answer: and some keepeth silence, <a href='#FN616'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>knowing his time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN617' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>A wise man will hold his tongue <a href='#FN618'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>till he see opportunity: but a babbler and a fool will regard no time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_8">8&#160;</span>He that useth many words shall be abhorred; and he that taketh to himself authority therein shall be hated. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_9">9&#160;</span>There is a sinner that hath good success in evil things; and <a href='#FN619'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>there is a <a href='#FN620'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>gain that turneth to loss. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_10">10&#160;</span>There is a gift that shall not profit thee; and there is a gift whose recompence is double. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN621' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>There is an abasement because of glory; and there is that lifteth up his head from a low estate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_12">12&#160;</span>There is that buyeth much for a little, and repayeth it <a href='#FN622'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>sevenfold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN623' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>A wise man by his words maketh him beloved: but the <a href='#FN624'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN625'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>graces of fools shall be <a href='#FN626'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>poured out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_14">14&#160;</span>The gift of a fool shall do thee no good when thou hast it; neither yet of the envious <a href='#FN627'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>for his necessity: <a href='#FN628'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for he looketh to receive many things for one. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_15">15&#160;</span>He giveth little, and <a href='#FN629'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>upbraideth much; <a href='#FN630'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>he openeth his mouth like a crier; to day he lendeth, and to morrow will he ask it again: such an one is to be hated of God and man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_16">16&#160;</span>The fool saith, I have no friends, I have no thank for all my good deeds, and <a href='#FN631'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>they that eat my bread speak evil of me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_17">17&#160;</span>How oft, and of how many shall he be laughed to scorn! for he knoweth not aright what it is to have; and it is <a href='#FN632'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>rr</a>all one unto him as if he had it not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_18">18&#160;</span>To slip upon a pavement is better than <a href='#FN633'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>to slip with the tongue: so the fall of the wicked shall come speedily. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN634' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN635' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>An unseasonable tale will always be in the mouth of the unwise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN636' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>A wise sentence shall be rejected when it cometh out of a fool’s mouth; for <a href='#FN637'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>he will not speak it in due season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_21">21&#160;</span>There is that is hindered from sinning through want: and when he taketh rest, he <a href='#FN638'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall not be troubled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN639' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>There is that destroyeth his own soul through <a href='#FN640'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>bashfulness, and by <a href='#FN641'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a><a href='#FN642'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>accepting of persons overthroweth himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_23">23&#160;</span>There is that for <a href='#FN643'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>bashfulness promiseth to his friend, and maketh him his enemy for nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN644' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>A lie is a foul blot in a man, yet it is continually in the mouth of the untaught. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN645' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>A thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie: but they both shall have destruction to heritage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_26">26&#160;</span>The disposition of a liar is <a href='#FN646'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dishonourable, and his shame is ever with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN647' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A wise man shall promote himself to honour with his words: and he that hath understanding will please great men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN648' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>He that tilleth his land shall increase his heap: and he that pleaseth great men shall get pardon for iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN649' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and <a href='#FN650'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stop up his mouth that he cannot reprove. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN651' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Wisdom that is hid, and <a href='#FN652'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>treasure that is hoarded up, what profit is in them both? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN653' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Better is he that hideth his folly <a href='#FN654'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a><a href='#FN655'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>than a man that hideth his wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_32">32&#160;</span>Necessary patience in seeking the Lord is better than he that leadeth his life without a guide.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_1">1&#160;</span>My son, hast thou sinned? <a href='#FN656'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>do so no more, but <a href='#FN657'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>ask pardon for thy former sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_2">2&#160;</span>Flee from sin as from the face of <a href='#FN658'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a serpent: for if thou comest too near it, it will <a href='#FN659'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>bite thee: the teeth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, <a href='#FN660'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>slaying the souls of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_3">3&#160;</span>All iniquity is as <a href='#FN661'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>a two edged sword, the wounds whereof cannot be healed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_4">4&#160;</span>To terrify and do wrong will waste riches: thus the house of proud men shall be made desolate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN662' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>A prayer out of a poor man’s mouth reacheth to the ears of God, and his judgment cometh speedily. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN663' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>He that hateth to be reproved is in the way of sinners: but he that feareth the Lord will <a href='#FN664'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>repent from his heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_7">7&#160;</span>An eloquent man is known far and near; but a man of understanding knoweth when he <a href='#FN665'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>slippeth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN666' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>He that buildeth his house with other men’s money is like one that gathereth himself stones for the tomb of his burial. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN667' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>The congregation of the wicked is like <a href='#FN668'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>tow wrapped together: and the end of them is a flame of fire to destroy them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_10">10&#160;</span>The way of sinners is <a href='#FN669'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>made plain with stones, <a href='#FN670'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>but at the end thereof is the pit of hell. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN671' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>He that keepeth the law of the Lord getteth the understanding thereof: and the perfection of the fear of the Lord is wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN672' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>He that is not <a href='#FN673'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wise will not be taught: but <a href='#FN674'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>there is a <a href='#FN675'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wisdom which multiplieth bitterness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_13">13&#160;</span>The knowledge of a wise man <a href='#FN676'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shall abound like a flood: and his counsel is like a pure fountain of life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN677' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>The inner parts of a fool are like <a href='#FN678'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>a broken vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_15">15&#160;</span>If a skilful man hear a wise word, he will commend it, and <a href='#FN679'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>add unto it: but as soon as one of no understanding heareth it, it displeaseth him, and <a href='#FN680'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>he casteth it behind his back. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_16">16&#160;</span>The talking of a fool is like <a href='#FN681'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>a burden in the way: but <a href='#FN682'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>grace shall be found in the lips of the wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_17">17&#160;</span>They enquire at the mouth of the wise man in the congregation, and they shall ponder his words in their heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_18">18&#160;</span>As is a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool: and the knowledge of the unwise is as talk <a href='#FN683'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>without sense. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_19">19&#160;</span>Doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles on the right hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN684' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>A fool lifteth up his voice with laughter; but a <a href='#FN685'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>wise man doth scarce smile a little. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_21">21&#160;</span>Learning is unto a wise man as an ornament of gold, and like a <a href='#FN686'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>bracelet upon his right arm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN687' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>A foolish man’s foot is soon in his <span class='add'>neighbour’s</span> house: but a man of experience is ashamed of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_23">23&#160;</span>A fool will <a href='#FN688'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>peep in at the door into the house: but he that is well nurtured will stand without. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_24">24&#160;</span>It is the rudeness of a man to hearken at the door: but a wise man will be grieved with the disgrace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_25">25&#160;</span>The lips of talkers will be telling such things as pertain not unto them: but the words of such as have understanding are <a href='#FN689'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>weighed in the balance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN690' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>The heart of fools is in their mouth: but the mouth of the wise is in their heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_27">27&#160;</span>When the ungodly curseth <a href='#FN691'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Satan, <a href='#FN692'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>he curseth his own soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN693' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>A whisperer defileth his own soul, and is hated wheresoever he dwelleth.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_1">1&#160;</span>A slothful man is compared to a filthy stone, and every one will hiss him out to his disgrace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_2">2&#160;</span>A slothful man is compared to the filth of a dunghill: every man that takes it up will shake his hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN694' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>An evilnurtured man is the dishonour of his father that begat him: and a <span class='add'>foolish</span> daughter is born to his loss. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_4">4&#160;</span>A wise daughter <a href='#FN695'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a><a href='#FN696'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall bring an inheritance to her husband: but she that liveth dishonestly is her father’s heaviness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_5">5&#160;</span>She that is bold dishonoureth both her father and her husband, but they both shall despise her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN697' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>A <a href='#FN698'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>tale out of season <span class='add'>is as</span> <a href='#FN699'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>musick in mourning: but stripes and correction of wisdom are never out of time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_7">7&#160;</span>Whoso teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potsherd together, and as he that waketh one from a sound sleep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_8">8&#160;</span>He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one in a slumber: when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the matter? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_9">9&#160;</span>If children live honestly, and have <a href='#FN700'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wherewithal, they shall cover the baseness of their parents. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_10">10&#160;</span>But children, being haughty, through disdain and want of nurture do stain the nobility of their kindred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN701' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Weep for the dead, for he hath lost the light: and weep for the fool, for he wanteth understanding: make little weeping for the dead, for he is at rest: but the life of the fool is worse than death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN702' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead; but for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_13">13&#160;</span>Talk not much with a fool, and go not to him that hath no understanding: <a href='#FN703'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>beware of him, lest thou have trouble, and thou shalt never be defiled <a href='#FN704'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with his fooleries: depart from him, and <a href='#FN705'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>thou shalt find rest, and never be <a href='#FN706'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>disquieted with madness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_14">14&#160;</span>What is heavier than lead? and what is the name thereof, but a fool? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN707' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is <a href='#FN708'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>easier to bear, than a man without understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_16">16&#160;</span>As timber girt and bound together in a building cannot be loosed with shaking: so <a href='#FN709'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the heart that is stablished by advised counsel shall fear at no time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_17">17&#160;</span>A heart settled upon a thought of understanding is as <a href='#FN710'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a fair plaistering <a href='#FN711'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>on the wall of a gallery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_18">18&#160;</span>Pales set on an high place will never stand against the wind: so <a href='#FN712'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>nn</a>a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool cannot stand against any fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_19">19&#160;</span>He that pricketh the eye will make tears to fall: and he that pricketh the heart maketh it to shew her knowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_20">20&#160;</span>Whoso casteth a stone at the birds <a href='#FN713'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>frayeth them away: and <a href='#FN714'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>he that upbraideth his friend breaketh friendship. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_21">21&#160;</span>Though thou drewest a sword at thy friend, yet despair not: for there may be a returning <span class='add'>to favour</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_22">22&#160;</span>If thou hast opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear not; for there may be a reconciliation: except for upbraiding, or pride, or <a href='#FN715'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound: for for these things every friend will depart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_23">23&#160;</span>Be faithful to thy neighbour in his poverty, that thou mayest rejoice in his prosperity: abide stedfast unto him in the time of his trouble, that thou mayest be heir with him in his heritage: for a mean estate is not always to be contemned: nor the rich that is foolish to be had in admiration. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_24">24&#160;</span>As the vapour and smoke of a furnace goeth before the fire; so reviling before blood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_25">25&#160;</span>I will not be ashamed to defend a friend; neither will I hide myself from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_26">26&#160;</span>And if any evil happen unto me by him, every one that heareth it will <a href='#FN716'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>beware of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_27">27&#160;</span>Who shall <a href='#FN717'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of <a href='#FN718'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_1">1&#160;</span>O Lord, Father and Governor of all my whole life, leave me not to their counsels, and let me not fall by them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_2">2&#160;</span>Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom over mine heart? that they spare me not for mine <a href='#FN719'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>ignorances, and it pass not by my sins: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_3">3&#160;</span>Lest mine <a href='#FN720'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>ignorances increase, and my sins abound to my destruction, and I fall before mine adversaries, and mine enemy rejoice over me, whose hope is far from thy mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_4">4&#160;</span>O Lord, Father and God of my life, give me not <a href='#FN721'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>a proud look, but turn away from thy servants always a <a href='#FN722'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>haughty mind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_5">5&#160;</span>Turn away from me vain hopes and concupiscence, and thou shalt hold him up that is desirous always to serve thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_6">6&#160;</span>Let not the greediness of the belly nor lust of the flesh take hold of me; and give not over me thy servant into an impudent mind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN723' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Hear, O ye children, the discipline of the mouth: he that keepeth it shall never be taken in his lips. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_8">8&#160;</span>The sinner shall be left in his foolishness: both the evil speaker and the proud shall fall thereby. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN724' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Accustom not thy mouth to swearing; neither use thyself to the naming of the Holy One. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_10">10&#160;</span>For as a servant that is continually beaten shall not be without <a href='#FN725'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a blue mark: so he that sweareth and nameth God continually shall not be faultless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_11">11&#160;</span>A man that useth much swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and <a href='#FN726'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the plague shall never depart from his house: if he shall offend, <a href='#FN727'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>his sin shall be upon him: and if he acknowledge not his sin, he maketh a double offence: and if he swear in vain, he shall not be <a href='#FN728'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>innocent, but his house shall be full of <a href='#FN729'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>calamities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN730' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>There is a word that is clothed about with death: God grant that it be not found in the heritage of Jacob; for all such things shall be far from the godly, and they shall not <a href='#FN731'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>wallow in their sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_13">13&#160;</span>Use not thy mouth to intemperate swearing, for therein is the word of sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_14">14&#160;</span>Remember thy father and thy mother, when thou sittest among great men. Be not forgetful before them, and so thou by thy custom become a fool, and <a href='#FN732'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>wish that thou hadst not been born, and curse they day of thy nativity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN733' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words will never be reformed all the days of his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN734' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Two sorts of men multiply sin, and the <a href='#FN735'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>third will bring wrath: a hot mind is as a burning fire, it will never be quenched till it be consumed: a fornicator <a href='#FN736'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>in the body of his flesh will never cease till he hath kindled a fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN737' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>All bread is sweet to a whoremonger, he will not leave off till he die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN738' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>A man that breaketh wedlock, saying thus in his heart, <a href='#FN739'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Who seeth me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, and no body seeth me; what need I to fear? the most High will not remember my sins: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_19">19&#160;</span>Such a man only feareth the eyes of men, and knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the sun, <a href='#FN740'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most secret parts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_20">20&#160;</span>He knew all things ere ever they were created; so also <a href='#FN741'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>after they were perfected he looked upon them all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN742' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and where he suspecteth not he shall be taken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_22">22&#160;</span>Thus shall it go also with the wife that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an heir by <a href='#FN743'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_23">23&#160;</span>For first, she hath disobeyed <a href='#FN744'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the law of the most High; and secondly, she hath trespassed against her own husband; and thirdly, she hath played the whore in adultery, and brought children by <a href='#FN745'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>another man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN746' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>She shall be brought out into the congregation, and <a href='#FN747'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN748'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>inquisition shall be made of her children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN749' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring forth no fruit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_26">26&#160;</span>She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her reproach shall not be blotted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_27">27&#160;</span>And they that remain shall know that there is nothing better than the fear of the Lord, and that there is nothing sweeter than to take heed unto the commandments of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_28">28&#160;</span>It is great glory to follow the Lord, and <a href='#FN750'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>yy</a>to be received of him is <a href='#FN751'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>long life.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN752' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Wisdom shall praise herself, and shall <a href='#FN753'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>glory in the midst of her people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_2">2&#160;</span>In the congregation of the most High shall she open her mouth, and <a href='#FN754'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>triumph before his power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_3">3&#160;</span>I came out of the mouth of the most High, and covered the earth as <a href='#FN755'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a cloud. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_4">4&#160;</span>I dwelt in high places, and <a href='#FN756'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>my throne is in a cloudy pillar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN757' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>I alone compassed the circuit of heaven, and walked in the bottom of the deep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_6">6&#160;</span>In the waves of the sea and in all the earth, and in every people and nation, I got a possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_7">7&#160;</span>With all these I sought rest: and in whose inheritance shall I abide? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_8">8&#160;</span>So the Creator of all things gave me a commandment, and he that made me caused my <a href='#FN758'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>tabernacle to rest, and said, Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN759' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>He created me from the beginning before the world, and I shall never fail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN760' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>In the holy tabernacle I served before him; and so <a href='#FN761'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>was I established in Sion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_11">11&#160;</span>Likewise <a href='#FN762'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in the <a href='#FN763'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>beloved city he gave me rest, and in Jerusalem was my power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_12">12&#160;</span>And I took root in an honourable people, even in the portion of the Lord’s inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_13">13&#160;</span>I was exalted like <a href='#FN764'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>a cedar in Libanus, and as <a href='#FN765'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>a cypress tree upon the mountains of <a href='#FN766'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Hermon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_14">14&#160;</span>I was exalted like <a href='#FN767'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>a palm tree in <a href='#FN768'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN769'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>En-gaddi, and as a <a href='#FN770'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>rose plant in Jericho, as a fair <a href='#FN771'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>olive tree in a pleasant field, and grew up as a plane tree <a href='#FN772'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>by the water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_15">15&#160;</span>I gave a sweet smell like <a href='#FN773'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>cinnamon and aspalathus, and I yielded a pleasant odour like the best <a href='#FN774'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>myrrh, as <a href='#FN775'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>galbanum, and onyx, and sweet storax, and as the fume of <a href='#FN776'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a><a href='#FN777'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>frankincense <a href='#FN778'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>in the tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_16">16&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN779'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the turpentine tree I stretched out my branches, and my branches are the branches of honour and grace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_17">17&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN780'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the vine brought I forth pleasant savour, and my flowers are the fruit of honour and riches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_18">18&#160;</span>I am the mother of fair love, and fear, and knowledge, and holy hope: I therefore, being eternal, am given to all my children which are <a href='#FN781'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>named of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN782' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Come unto me, all ye that be desirous of me, and fill yourselves with my fruits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_20">20&#160;</span>For my memorial is <a href='#FN783'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>sweeter than honey, and mine inheritance than the honeycomb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN784' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a><a href='#FN785' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>They that eat me shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me shall yet be thirsty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_22">22&#160;</span>He that obeyeth me shall never be confounded, and they that work by me shall not do amiss. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_23">23&#160;</span>All these things are the book of the covenant of the most high God, even <a href='#FN786'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the law which Moses commanded for an heritage unto the congregations of Jacob. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_24">24&#160;</span>Faint not to be strong in the Lord; that he may confirm you, <a href='#FN787'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>cleave unto him: for <a href='#FN788'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the Lord <a href='#FN789'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>Almighty is God alone, and beside him there is no other Saviour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN790' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>He filleth all things with his wisdom, as <a href='#FN791'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Phison and as <a href='#FN792'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a><a href='#FN793'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Tigris in the time of the new fruits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_26">26&#160;</span>He maketh the understanding to abound like <a href='#FN794'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Euphrates, and as <a href='#FN795'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Jordan in the time of the harvest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_27">27&#160;</span>He maketh the doctrine of knowledge appear as the light, and as <a href='#FN796'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Geon in the time of vintage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_28">28&#160;</span>The first man knew her not perfectly: no more shall the last find her out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_29">29&#160;</span>For her thoughts are more than the sea, and her counsels profounder than the great deep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_30">30&#160;</span>I also came out as a <a href='#FN797'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>brook from a river, and <a href='#FN798'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>as a conduit into a <a href='#FN799'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>garden. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_31">31&#160;</span>I said, I will water my best garden, and will water abundantly my garden bed: and, lo, my brook became a river, and my river became a sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_32">32&#160;</span>I will yet make doctrine to shine as the morning, and will send forth her light afar off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_33">33&#160;</span>I will yet pour out <a href='#FN800'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>doctrine as <a href='#FN801'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>prophecy, and leave it to all ages for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_34">34&#160;</span>Behold <a href='#FN802'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>that I have not laboured for myself only, but for all them that seek wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN803' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>In three things I <a href='#FN804'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>was beautified, and stood up <a href='#FN805'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>beautiful both before God and men: <a href='#FN806'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the unity of brethren, <a href='#FN807'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the love of neighbours, a man and a wife <a href='#FN808'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that agree together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN809' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Three sorts of men my soul hateth, and I am greatly offended at their life: a poor man that is proud, a rich man that is a <a href='#FN810'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>liar, and an old adulterer <a href='#FN811'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>that doateth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_3">3&#160;</span>If thou hast gathered nothing in thy youth, how canst thou find any thing in thine age? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_4">4&#160;</span>O how <a href='#FN812'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs, and for ancient men to know counsel! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_5">5&#160;</span>O how <a href='#FN813'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>comely is the wisdom of old men, and understanding and counsel to men of honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_6">6&#160;</span>Much experience is <a href='#FN814'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the crown of old men, and <a href='#FN815'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the fear of God is their glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_7">7&#160;</span>There be <a href='#FN816'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>nine things which I have judged in mine heart to be happy, and <a href='#FN817'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the tenth I will utter with my tongue: A man that hath joy of his children; and <a href='#FN818'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>he that liveth to see the fall of his enemy: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_8">8&#160;</span>Well is him that dwelleth with a wife of understanding, and that hath not <a href='#FN819'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served a man more unworthy than himself: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_9">9&#160;</span>Well is him that hath found <a href='#FN820'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prudence, and he that speaketh in the ears of them that will hear: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN821' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>O how great is he that findeth wisdom! yet is there none above him that feareth the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN822' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>But the love of the Lord passeth all things for <a href='#FN823'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>illumination: he that holdeth it, <a href='#FN824'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>whereto shall he be likened? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN825' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>The fear of the Lord is the beginning of his love: and faith is the beginning of cleaving unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Give me</span> any plague, <a href='#FN826'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>but the plague of the heart: and <a href='#FN827'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_14">14&#160;</span>And any <a href='#FN828'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>affliction, but the <a href='#FN829'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>affliction from them that hate me: and any revenge, but the revenge of enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_15">15&#160;</span>There is no head above the <a href='#FN830'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>head of a serpent; and there is no wrath above the wrath of an enemy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN831' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>I had rather dwell with a lion and a dragon, than to keep house with a wicked woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_17">17&#160;</span>The <a href='#FN832'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>wickedness of a woman changeth her face, and darkeneth her countenance <a href='#FN833'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>like sackcloth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_18">18&#160;</span>Her husband shall sit among his neighbours; and when he heareth it shall sigh bitterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN834' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman: let the portion of a sinner fall upon her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_20">20&#160;</span>As the climbing up a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is a wife <a href='#FN835'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>full of words to a quiet man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN836' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Stumble not at the beauty of a woman, and desire her not for pleasure. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_22">22&#160;</span>A woman, if she maintain her husband, is full of anger, impudence, and much reproach. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN837' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>A wicked woman abateth the courage, maketh an heavy countenance and <a href='#FN838'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>a wounded heart: a woman that will not comfort her husband in distress maketh <a href='#FN839'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>weak hands and feeble knees. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN840' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN841' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Give the water no passage; neither a wicked woman liberty <a href='#FN842'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>to gad abroad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_26">26&#160;</span>If she go not as thou wouldest have her, cut her off from thy flesh, and <a href='#FN843'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>give her a bill of divorce, and let her go.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN844' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Blessed is the man that hath <a href='#FN845'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a virtuous wife, for the number of his days shall be double. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_2">2&#160;</span>A <a href='#FN846'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and he shall fulfil the years of his life in peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN847' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>A good wife is a good portion, which shall be given in the portion of them that fear the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_4">4&#160;</span>Whether a man be rich or poor, if he have a good heart toward the Lord, he shall at all times rejoice with a cheerful countenance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_5">5&#160;</span>There be <a href='#FN848'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>three things that mine heart feareth; and for the fourth I was sore afraid: <a href='#FN849'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the slander of a city, the gathering together of an unruly multitude, and a false accusation: all these are worse than death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_6">6&#160;</span>But a grief of heart and sorrow is <a href='#FN850'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>dd</a>a woman that is jealous over another woman, and a scourge of the tongue which communicateth with all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_7">7&#160;</span>An evil wife is <a href='#FN851'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a yoke shaken to and fro: he that hath hold of her is as though he held <a href='#FN852'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>a scorpion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_8">8&#160;</span>A drunken woman and a <a href='#FN853'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>gadder abroad causeth great anger, and she will not cover her own shame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_9">9&#160;</span>The whoredom of a woman may be known in her <a href='#FN854'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>haughty looks and eyelids. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN855' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>If thy daughter be <a href='#FN856'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>shameless, keep her in straitly, lest she abuse herself through overmuch liberty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_11">11&#160;</span>Watch over an impudent eye: and marvel not if she trespass against thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_12">12&#160;</span>She will open her mouth, as a thirsty traveller when he hath found a fountain, and drink of every water near her: by every <a href='#FN857'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hedge will she sit down, and open her quiver against every arrow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_13">13&#160;</span>The grace of a wife delighteth her husband, and her discretion will <a href='#FN858'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>fatten his bones. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_14">14&#160;</span>A silent and loving woman is a gift of the Lord; and there is nothing so much worth as a mind well instructed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_15">15&#160;</span>A shamefaced and faithful woman is a double grace, and her continent mind cannot be valued. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_16">16&#160;</span>As the sun when it ariseth <a href='#FN859'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in the high heaven; so is the beauty of <a href='#FN860'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a good wife in the <a href='#FN861'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ordering of her house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_17">17&#160;</span>As the clear light is upon <a href='#FN862'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the holy candlestick; so is the beauty of the face <a href='#FN863'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in ripe age. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_18">18&#160;</span>As the golden pillars are upon the sockets of silver; so are the <a href='#FN864'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fair feet with a constant <a href='#FN865'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN866' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>My son, keep the flower of thine <a href='#FN867'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>age sound; and give not thy strength to strangers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_20">20&#160;</span>When thou hast gotten a fruitful possession through all the field, sow it with thine own seed, trusting in the goodness of thy stock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_21">21&#160;</span>So thy race which thou leavest shall be magnified, having the confidence of their good descent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_22">22&#160;</span>An harlot shall be accounted as <a href='#FN868'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>spittle; but <a href='#FN869'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a married woman is a tower against death <a href='#FN870'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to her husband. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_23">23&#160;</span>A wicked woman is given as a portion to a wicked man: but a godly woman is given to him that feareth the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_24">24&#160;</span>A dishonest woman contemneth shame: but an honest <a href='#FN871'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>woman will reverence her husband. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_25">25&#160;</span>A <a href='#FN872'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>shameless woman shall be counted as a dog; but she that is shamefaced will fear the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_26">26&#160;</span>A woman that honoureth her husband shall be judged wise of all; but she that dishonoureth him in her pride shall be counted ungodly of all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_27">27&#160;</span>A loud crying woman and a <a href='#FN873'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>scold shall be sought out to drive away the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_28">28&#160;</span>There be <a href='#FN874'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>two things that grieve my heart; and the third maketh me angry: a man of war that suffereth poverty; and <a href='#FN875'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>men of understanding that are <a href='#FN876'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>not set by; and <a href='#FN877'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>one that returneth from righteousness to sin; <a href='#FN878'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the Lord prepareth such an one for the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_29">29&#160;</span>A <a href='#FN879'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>merchant shall hardly keep himself from doing wrong; and an huckster shall not be <a href='#FN880'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>freed from sin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_1">1&#160;</span>Many <a href='#FN881'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>have sinned for <a href='#FN882'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a small matter; and he that <a href='#FN883'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>seeketh for abundance will turn his eyes away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_2">2&#160;</span>As a <a href='#FN884'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>nail sticketh fast between the joinings of the stones; so <a href='#FN885'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>doth sin stick close between buying and selling. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_3">3&#160;</span>Unless a man hold himself diligently in the fear of the Lord, his house shall soon be overthrown. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_4">4&#160;</span>As when one sifteth with a sieve, the refuse remaineth; so the <a href='#FN886'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>filth of man in his <a href='#FN887'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN888'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>talk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN889' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>The furnace proveth the potter’s vessels; so <a href='#FN890'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the trial of man is in his <a href='#FN891'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>reasoning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN892' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>The fruit declareth if the tree have been dressed; so is the utterance of a conceit in the heart of man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_7">7&#160;</span>Praise no man before thou hearest him <a href='#FN893'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>speak; for <a href='#FN894'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>this is the trial of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_8">8&#160;</span>If thou followest <a href='#FN895'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>righteousness, thou shalt obtain her, and <a href='#FN896'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>put her on, <a href='#FN897'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>as a glorious long robe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_9">9&#160;</span>The birds will <a href='#FN898'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>resort unto their like; so will truth return unto them that practise in her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_10">10&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN899'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the lion lieth in wait for the prey; so sin for them that work iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_11">11&#160;</span>The discourse of a godly man is always with wisdom; but a fool changeth as the moon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_12">12&#160;</span>If thou be among the indiscreet, <a href='#FN900'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>observe the time; but be continually among men of understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_13">13&#160;</span>The discourse of fools is irksome, and their sport is the <a href='#FN901'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>wantonness of sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN902' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>The talk of him that sweareth much maketh the hair stand upright; and their brawls make one stop his ears. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_15">15&#160;</span>The strife of the proud is bloodshedding, and their revilings are grievous to the ear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN903' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Whoso discovereth secrets loseth his credit; and shall never find friend to his mind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_17">17&#160;</span>Love thy friend, and be faithful unto him: but <a href='#FN904'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>if thou <a href='#FN905'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>betrayest his secrets, <a href='#FN906'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>follow no more after him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_18">18&#160;</span>For as a man hath destroyed his enemy; so hast thou lost the love of thy neighbor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN907' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>As one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou let thy neighbour go, and shalt not get him again </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN908' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Follow after him no more, for he is too far off; he is as a roe escaped out of the snare. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_21">21&#160;</span>As for a wound, it may be bound up; and after reviling there may be <a href='#FN909'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>reconcilement: but <a href='#FN910'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>he that <a href='#FN911'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>betrayeth secrets is without hope. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_22">22&#160;</span>He that <a href='#FN912'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>winketh with the eyes worketh evil: and he that knoweth him will depart from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_23">23&#160;</span>When thou art present, <a href='#FN913'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>he will speak sweetly, and will admire thy words: but at the last he will <a href='#FN914'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>writhe his mouth, and slander thy sayings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_24">24&#160;</span>I have hated many things, but nothing like him; for the Lord will hate him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_25">25&#160;</span>Whoso casteth a stone on high <a href='#FN915'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>casteth it on his own head; and a deceitful stroke shall make wounds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN916' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that setteth <a href='#FN917'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a trap shall be taken therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_27">27&#160;</span>He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon him, and he shall not know whence it cometh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_28">28&#160;</span>Mockery and reproach are from the proud; but <a href='#FN918'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>vengeance, as <a href='#FN919'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>a lion, shall lie in wait for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_29">29&#160;</span>They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous shall be <a href='#FN920'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>taken in the snare; and anguish shall consume them before they die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN921' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Malice and wrath, even these are abominations; and the sinful man shall have them both.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN922' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>He that revengeth shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins <span class='add'>in remembrance</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN923' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Forgive thy neighbour the hurt that he hath done unto thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven when thou prayest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN924' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>One man beareth hatred against another, and doth he seek pardon from the Lord? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_4">4&#160;</span>He sheweth no mercy to a man, which is like himself: and doth he ask forgiveness of his own sins? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_5">5&#160;</span>If he that is but flesh nourish <a href='#FN925'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>hatred, who will intreat for pardon of his sins? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN926' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Remember thy end, and let enmity cease; <span class='add'>remember</span> corruption and death, and abide in the commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_7">7&#160;</span>Remember the commandments, and <a href='#FN927'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>bear no malice to thy neighbour: <span class='add'>remember</span> the covenant of the Highest, and <a href='#FN928'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>wink at ignorance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN929' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Abstain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins: for a furious man will kindle strife, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_9">9&#160;</span>A sinful man disquieteth friends, and maketh <a href='#FN930'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>debate among them that be at peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN931' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>As the <a href='#FN932'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>matter of the fire is, so it burneth: and as a man’s strength is, so is his wrath; and according to his riches his anger riseth; and the stronger they are which contend, the more they will be inflamed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN933' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>An hasty contention kindleth a fire: and an hasty fighting sheddeth blood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_12">12&#160;</span>If thou blow the spark, it shall burn: <a href='#FN934'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>if thou spit upon it, it shall be quenched: and both these come out of thy mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_13">13&#160;</span>Curse the <a href='#FN935'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>whisperer and <a href='#FN936'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>doubletongued: for such have destroyed many that were at peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_14">14&#160;</span>A backbiting tongue hath disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation: strong cities hath it pulled down, and overthrown the houses of great men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_15">15&#160;</span>A <a href='#FN937'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>backbiting tongue hath cast out <a href='#FN938'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>virtuous women, and deprived them of their labours. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_16">16&#160;</span>Whoso hearkeneth unto it shall never find rest, and never dwell quietly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_17">17&#160;</span>The stroke of the whip maketh <a href='#FN939'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>marks in the flesh: but the stroke of the tongue breaketh the bones. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_18">18&#160;</span>Many have fallen by <a href='#FN940'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the edge of the sword: but not so many as have fallen by the tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_19">19&#160;</span>Well is he that is defended through the venom thereof; who hath not drawn the yoke thereof, nor hath been bound in her bands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN941' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>For the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof are bands of brass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_21">21&#160;</span>The death thereof is an evil death, <a href='#FN942'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the grave were better than it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN943' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>It shall not have rule over them that fear God, neither shall they be burned with the flame thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_23">23&#160;</span>Such as forsake the Lord shall fall into it; and it shall burn in them, and not be quenched; it shall be sent upon them as a lion, and devour them as a <a href='#FN944'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>leopard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_24">24&#160;</span>Look that <a href='#FN945'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>thou hedge thy possession about with thorns, and <a href='#FN946'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>bind up thy silver and gold, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_25">25&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN947'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>weigh thy words in a balance, and <a href='#FN948'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>make a door and bar for thy mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_26">26&#160;</span>Beware thou slide not by it, lest thou fall before him that lieth in wait.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN949' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>He that is merciful will lend unto his neighbour; and he that strengtheneth his hand <a href='#FN950'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>keepeth the commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN951' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Lend to thy neighbour in time of his need, and pay thou thy neighbour again in due season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_3">3&#160;</span>Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him, and thou shalt always find the thing that is necessary for thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN952' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Many, when a thing was lent them, reckoned it <a href='#FN953'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>to be found, and <a href='#FN954'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>put them to trouble that helped them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_5">5&#160;</span>Till he hath received, he will kiss a man’s hand; and for his neighbour’s money he will speak submissly: but when he should repay, he will prolong the time, and return words of grief, and complain of the time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN955' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>If he prevail, he shall hardly receive the half, and he will count <a href='#FN956'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>as if he had found it: if not, he hath deprived him of his money, and he hath gotten him an enemy without cause: he payeth him with cursings and railings; and for honour he will pay him disgrace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_7">7&#160;</span>Many therefore have refused to lend for other men’s ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_8">8&#160;</span>Yet have thou patience with a man in poor estate, and delay not to shew him mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_9">9&#160;</span>Help the poor <a href='#FN957'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>for the commandment’s sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_10">10&#160;</span>Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend, and <a href='#FN958'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>let it not rust under a stone to be lost. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN959' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Lay up thy treasure <a href='#FN960'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>according to the commandments of the most High, and <a href='#FN961'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>it shall bring thee more profit than gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN962' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Shut up alms in thy <a href='#FN963'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>storehouses: and it shall deliver thee from all affliction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN964' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>It shall fight for thee against thine enemies better than a mighty shield and strong spear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_14">14&#160;</span>An honest man is surety for his neighbour: but he that is impudent will <a href='#FN965'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN966'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>forsake him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_15">15&#160;</span>Forget not the friendship of thy surety, for he hath given <a href='#FN967'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>his life for thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_16">16&#160;</span>A sinner will overthrow the good estate of his surety: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_17">17&#160;</span>And he that is of an unthankful mind will leave him <span class='add'>in danger</span> that delivered him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN968' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Suretiship hath undone many of good estate, and shaken them as a wave of the sea: mighty men hath it driven from their houses, so that they wandered among strange nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_19">19&#160;</span>A wicked man transgressing the commandments of the Lord shall fall into suretiship: and he that undertaketh and followeth other men’s business for gain shall fall into suits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_20">20&#160;</span>Help thy neighbour according to thy power, and beware that thou thyself fall not into the same. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_21">21&#160;</span>The <a href='#FN969'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>chief thing for life is water, and <a href='#FN970'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>bread, and clothing, and an house to cover shame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_22">22&#160;</span>Better is the life of a poor man in a mean cottage, than delicate fare in another man’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN971' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Be it little or much, hold thee contented, that thou hear not the reproach of thy house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_24">24&#160;</span>For it is a miserable life to go from house to house: for where thou art a stranger, thou darest not open thy mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_25">25&#160;</span>Thou shalt entertain, and feast, and have no thanks: moreover thou shalt hear bitter words: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN972' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Come, thou stranger, and furnish a table, and feed me of that thou hast ready. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN973' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Give place, thou stranger, to an honourable man; my brother cometh to be lodged, and I have need of mine house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_28">28&#160;</span>These things are grievous to a man of understanding; <a href='#FN974'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the upbraiding of houseroom, and <a href='#FN975'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>reproaching of the lender.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN976' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN977' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>He that loveth his son causeth him oft to feel the rod, that he may have joy of him <a href='#FN978'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_2">2&#160;</span>He that chastiseth his son shall have <a href='#FN979'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>joy in him, and shall rejoice of him among his <a href='#FN980'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>acquaintance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_3">3&#160;</span>He that <a href='#FN981'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>teacheth his son grieveth the enemy: and before his friends he shall rejoice of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_4">4&#160;</span>Though his father die, yet he is as though he were not dead: for he hath left one behind him that is like himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_5">5&#160;</span>While he lived, he <a href='#FN982'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>saw and rejoiced in him: and when he died, he was not sorrowful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN983' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>He left behind him an avenger against his enemies, and one that shall requite kindness to his friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_7">7&#160;</span>He that maketh too much of his son shall bind up his wounds; and his bowels will be troubled at every cry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_8">8&#160;</span>An horse not broken becometh headstrong: and a child left to himself will be wilful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_9">9&#160;</span>Cocker thy child, and he shall make thee <a href='#FN984'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>afraid: play with him, and he will bring thee to heaviness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_10">10&#160;</span>Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow with him, and lest thou gnash thy teeth <a href='#FN985'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_11">11&#160;</span>Give him no liberty in his youth, and <a href='#FN986'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>wink not at his follies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN987' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides while he is a child, lest he wax stubborn, and be disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_13">13&#160;</span>Chastise thy son, and <a href='#FN988'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>hold him to labour, lest his lewd behaviour be an offence unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN989' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Better is the poor, being sound and strong of constitution, than a rich man that is afflicted in his body. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_15">15&#160;</span>Health and good estate of body are above all gold, and a strong body above infinite wealth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_16">16&#160;</span>There is no riches above a sound body, and no joy above the joy of the heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_17">17&#160;</span>Death is better than a bitter life or continual sickness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_18">18&#160;</span>Delicates poured upon a mouth shut up are as <a href='#FN990'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>messes of meat set upon a grave. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN991' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>What good doeth the <a href='#FN992'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>offering unto an idol? for neither can it eat <a href='#FN993'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>nor smell: so is he that is <a href='#FN994'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>persecuted of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_20">20&#160;</span>He seeth with his eyes and groaneth, <a href='#FN995'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>as an eunuch that embraceth a virgin and sigheth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN996' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Give not over thy mind to heaviness, and afflict not thyself in thine own counsel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN997' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>The gladness of the heart is the life of man, and the <a href='#FN998'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>joyfulness of a man prolongeth his days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_23">23&#160;</span>Love thine own soul, and comfort thy heart, remove sorrow far from thee: for <a href='#FN999'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>sorrow hath killed many, and there is no profit therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_24">24&#160;</span>Envy and wrath shorten the life, and carefulness bringeth age before the time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1000' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>A cheerful and <a href='#FN1001'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>good heart will have a care of his meat and diet.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1002' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Watching for riches consumeth the flesh, and <a href='#FN1003'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the care thereof driveth away sleep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_2">2&#160;</span>Watching care will not let a man slumber, as a sore disease breaketh sleep, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_3">3&#160;</span>The rich hath great labour in gathering riches together; and <a href='#FN1004'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>when he resteth, he is filled with his delicates. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_4">4&#160;</span>The poor laboureth in his poor estate; and when he leaveth off, he is still needy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN1005' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>He that loveth gold shall not be justified, and he that followeth corruption shall have enough thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1006' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Gold hath been the ruin of many, and their destruction was present. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_7">7&#160;</span>It is a stumblingblock unto them <a href='#FN1007'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>that sacrifice unto it, and every fool shall be taken therewith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN1008' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Blessed is the rich that is found without blemish, and hath not <a href='#FN1009'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>gone after gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_9">9&#160;</span>Who is he? and we will call him blessed: for wonderful things hath he done among his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_10">10&#160;</span>Who hath been tried thereby, and found perfect? then let him glory. Who might offend, and hath not offended? or done evil, and hath not done it? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_11">11&#160;</span>His goods shall be established, and the congregation shall declare his alms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_12">12&#160;</span>If thou sit at a bountiful table, <a href='#FN1010'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a><a href='#FN1011'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a><a href='#FN1012'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be not greedy upon it, and say not, There is much meat on it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_13">13&#160;</span>Remember that <a href='#FN1013'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>a wicked eye is an evil thing: and what is created more wicked than an eye? therefore it weepeth <a href='#FN1014'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>upon every occasion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN1015' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>jj</a>Stretch not thine hand whithersoever it looketh, and thrust it not with him <a href='#FN1016'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>into the dish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN1017' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Judge not thy neighbour by thyself: and be discreet in every point. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1018' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Eat as it becometh a man, those things which are set before thee; and devour not, lest thou be hated. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_17">17&#160;</span>Leave off first for manners’ sake; and <a href='#FN1019'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>be not unsatiable, lest thou offend. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_18">18&#160;</span>When thou sittest among many, <a href='#FN1020'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>jj</a>reach not thine hand out first of all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_19">19&#160;</span>A very little is sufficient for a man well nurtured, <a href='#FN1021'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and he fetcheth not his wind short upon his bed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_20">20&#160;</span>Sound sleep cometh of moderate eating: he riseth early, and his wits are with him: but the pain of watching, and <a href='#FN1022'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>choler, and pangs of the belly, are with an unsatiable man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_21">21&#160;</span>And if thou hast been forced to eat, arise, go forth, <a href='#FN1023'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>vomit, and thou shalt have rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_22">22&#160;</span>My son, hear me, and despise me not, and <a href='#FN1024'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>at the last thou shalt find as I told thee: <a href='#FN1025'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>qq</a>in all thy works be quick, so shall there no sickness come unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1026' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Whoso is <a href='#FN1027'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>liberal of his meat, <a href='#FN1028'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>men shall speak well of him; and the report of his good housekeeping will be believed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_24">24&#160;</span>But against him that is a niggard of his meat the whole city shall murmur; and the testimonies of his niggardness shall not be doubted of. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1029' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Shew not thy valiantness in wine; for <a href='#FN1030'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>wine hath destroyed many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_26">26&#160;</span>The furnace proveth the edge by dipping: so doth wine the hearts of the proud by drunkeness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN1031' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Wine is as good as life to a man, if it be drunk moderately: what life is then to a man that is without wine? <a href='#FN1032'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>for it was made to make men <a href='#FN1033'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>glad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_28">28&#160;</span>Wine measurably drunk and in season bringeth gladness of the heart, and <a href='#FN1034'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>cheerfulness of the mind: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_29">29&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN1035'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>wine drunken with excess maketh bitterness of the mind, with brawling and quarrelling. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_30">30&#160;</span>Drunkenness increaseth the rage of a fool till he offend: it diminisheth strength, and maketh wounds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN1036' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Rebuke not thy neighbour at the wine, and despise him not in his <a href='#FN1037'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>mirth: give him no despiteful words, and <a href='#FN1038'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>press not upon him with urging him <span class='add'>to drink</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_1">1&#160;</span>If thou be made <a href='#FN1039'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the master <span class='add'>of a feast</span>, lift not thyself up, but be among them as one of the rest; take diligent care for them, and so sit down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_2">2&#160;</span>And when thou hast done all thy office, <a href='#FN1040'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>take thy place, that thou mayest be merry with them, and receive <a href='#FN1041'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a crown for thy well ordering of the feast. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1042' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Speak, thou that art the elder, for it becometh thee, but with sound judgment; and hinder not musick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_4">4&#160;</span>Pour not out words where there is a musician, and <a href='#FN1043'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>shew not forth wisdom out of time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN1044' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>A concert of musick in a banquet of wine is as a signet of <a href='#FN1045'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>carbuncle set in gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_6">6&#160;</span>As a signet of an <a href='#FN1046'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>emerald set in a work of gold, so is the melody of musick with pleasant wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN1047' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Speak, young man, if there be need of thee: and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_8">8&#160;</span>Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in few words; be as one that knoweth and yet holdeth his tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_9">9&#160;</span>If thou be among great men, make not thyself equal with them; and <a href='#FN1048'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>when ancient men are in place, use not many words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_10">10&#160;</span>Before the thunder goeth lightning; and before a shamefaced man shall go favour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_11">11&#160;</span>Rise up betimes, and be not the last; but get thee home without delay. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_12">12&#160;</span>There take thy pastime, and do what thou wilt: but sin not by proud speech. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_13">13&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1049'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>for these things bless him that made thee, and hath <a href='#FN1050'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>replenished thee with his good things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_14">14&#160;</span>Whoso feareth the Lord will receive his discipline; and <a href='#FN1051'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>they that seek him early shall find favour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_15">15&#160;</span>He that seeketh the law <a href='#FN1052'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>shall be filled therewith: but <a href='#FN1053'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the hypocrite will be offended thereat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_16">16&#160;</span>They that fear the Lord shall find judgment, and shall kindle justice <a href='#FN1054'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>as a light. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1055' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>A sinful man will not be reproved, but findeth an excuse according to his will. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_18">18&#160;</span>A man of counsel will be considerate; but a strange and proud man is not daunted with fear, even when of himself he hath done without counsel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1056' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Do nothing without advice; and <a href='#FN1057'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>when thou hast once done, repent not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_20">20&#160;</span>Go not in a way wherein thou mayest fall, and <a href='#FN1058'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>stumble not among the stones. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_21">21&#160;</span>Be not confident in a <a href='#FN1059'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>plain way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_22">22&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1060'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>beware of thine own children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1061' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>In every good work trust thy own soul; for this is <a href='#FN1062'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the keeping of the commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_24">24&#160;</span>He that believeth in the Lord <a href='#FN1063'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>taketh heed to the commandment; and he that trusteth in him <a href='#FN1064'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shall fare never the worse.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1065' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>There shall no evil happen unto him that feareth the Lord; but <a href='#FN1066'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in temptation even again he will deliver him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_2">2&#160;</span>A wise man hateth not the law; but <a href='#FN1067'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>he that is an hypocrite therein is <a href='#FN1068'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>as a ship in a storm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_3">3&#160;</span>A man of understanding trusteth in the law; and the law is faithful unto him, <a href='#FN1069'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as an oracle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_4">4&#160;</span>Prepare what to say, and so thou shalt be heard: and bind up instruction, and then make answer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_5">5&#160;</span>The <a href='#FN1070'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heart of the foolish is like <a href='#FN1071'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a cartwheel; and his thoughts are like <a href='#FN1072'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a rolling axletree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_6">6&#160;</span>A stallion horse is as a mocking friend, he neigheth under every one that sitteth upon him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_7">7&#160;</span>Why doth one day excel another, when as all the light of every day in the year is of the sun? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_8">8&#160;</span>By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished: and he <a href='#FN1073'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>altered seasons and feasts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_9">9&#160;</span>Some of them hath he made high days, and <a href='#FN1074'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>hallowed them, and some of them hath he <a href='#FN1075'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>made ordinary days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_10">10&#160;</span>And all men are from the ground, and <a href='#FN1076'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Adam was created of earth: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_11">11&#160;</span>In much knowledge the Lord hath divided them, and <a href='#FN1077'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>made their ways diverse. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_12">12&#160;</span>Some of them hath he blessed and exalted and some of them he sanctified, and set near himself: but some of them hath he cursed and brought low, and turned out of their <a href='#FN1078'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>places. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN1079' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>As the clay is in the potter’s hand, to fashion it at his pleasure: so man is in the hand of him that made him, to render to them as liketh him best. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_14">14&#160;</span>Good is set against evil, and life against death: so is the godly against the sinner, and the sinner against the godly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_15">15&#160;</span>So look upon all the works of the most High; and there are <a href='#FN1080'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>two and two, one against another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_16">16&#160;</span>I awaked up <a href='#FN1081'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>last of all, <a href='#FN1082'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>as one that <a href='#FN1083'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>gathereth after the grapegatherers: by the blessing of the Lord I profited, and tred my <a href='#FN1084'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>winepress like a gatherer of grapes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_17">17&#160;</span>Consider <a href='#FN1085'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>that I laboured not for myself only, but for all them that seek learning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_18">18&#160;</span>Hear me, O ye great men of the people, and hearken with your ears, ye rulers of the congregation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_19">19&#160;</span>Give not <a href='#FN1086'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over thee while thou livest, and give not thy goods to another: lest it repent thee, and thou intreat for the same again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_20">20&#160;</span>As long as thou livest and hast breath in thee, <a href='#FN1087'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>give not thyself over to any. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_21">21&#160;</span>For better it is that thy children should seek to thee, than that thou shouldest <a href='#FN1088'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>stand to their courtesy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_22">22&#160;</span>In all thy works keep to thyself the preeminence; leave not a stain in thine honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_23">23&#160;</span>At the time when thou shalt end thy days, and finish thy life, distribute thine inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN1089' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Fodder, a wand, and burdens, are for the ass; and bread, correction, and work, for a servant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_25">25&#160;</span>If thou <a href='#FN1090'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>set thy servant to labour, thou shalt find rest: but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_26">26&#160;</span>A yoke and a collar do bow the neck: <a href='#FN1091'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>so are tortures and torments for an evil servant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_27">27&#160;</span>Send him to labour, that he be not idle; for idleness teacheth much evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_28">28&#160;</span>Set him to work, as is fit for him: if he be not obedient, put on more heavy fetters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_29">29&#160;</span>But be not excessive toward any; and <a href='#FN1092'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>without discretion do nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN1093' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>If thou have a servant, let him be unto thee as thyself, because thou hast bought him <a href='#FN1094'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with a price. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_31">31&#160;</span>If thou have a servant, entreat him as a brother: for thou hast need of him, as of thine own soul: <a href='#FN1095'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>if thou entreat him evil, and he run from thee, which way wilt thou go to seek him?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1096' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The hopes of a man void of understanding are vain and false: and dreams lift up fools. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_2">2&#160;</span>Whoso <a href='#FN1097'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>regardeth dreams is like him that catcheth at a shadow, and followeth after the wind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_3">3&#160;</span>The vision of dreams is the resemblance of one thing to another, even as <a href='#FN1098'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the likeness of a face to a face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1099' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Of an unclean thing what can be cleansed? and from that thing which is false what truth can come? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_5">5&#160;</span>Divinations, and soothsayings, and dreams, are vain: and the heart fancieth, as a woman’s heart in travail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>If they be not sent from the most High in thy <a href='#FN1101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>visitation, <a href='#FN1102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>set not thy heart upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_7">7&#160;</span>For dreams have deceived many, and they have failed that put their trust in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_8">8&#160;</span>The law shall be found perfect <a href='#FN1103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>without lies: and wisdom is perfection to a faithful mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_9">9&#160;</span>A man that hath travelled knoweth many things; and <a href='#FN1104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>he that hath much experience will declare wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_10">10&#160;</span>He that hath no experience knoweth little: but he that hath travelled is full of <a href='#FN1105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>prudence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_11">11&#160;</span>When I travelled, I saw many things; and I understand more than I can express. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_12">12&#160;</span>I was ofttimes in danger of death: yet I was delivered because of <a href='#FN1106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_13">13&#160;</span>The spirit of those that fear the Lord shall live; for their hope is in him that saveth them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_14">14&#160;</span>Whoso feareth the Lord shall not fear nor be afraid; for <a href='#FN1107'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>he is his hope. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_15">15&#160;</span>Blessed is the soul of him that feareth the Lord: to whom doth he <a href='#FN1108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>look? and who is his strength? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_16">16&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the eyes of the Lord are upon them that love him, he is their <a href='#FN1110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>mighty protection and strong stay, <a href='#FN1111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>a defence from heat, and a cover from the sun at noon, a preservation from stumbling, and an help from falling. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_17">17&#160;</span>He raiseth up the soul, and lighteneth the eyes: he giveth health, life, and blessing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_18">18&#160;</span>He that sacrificeth of a thing <a href='#FN1112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>wrongfully gotten, his offering is ridiculous; and <a href='#FN1113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the gifts of unjust men are not accepted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>The most High is not pleased with the offerings of the wicked; <a href='#FN1115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>neither is he pacified for sin by the multitude of sacrifices. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN1116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Whoso bringeth an offering of the goods of the poor doeth as one that killeth the son before his father’s eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_21">21&#160;</span>The bread of the needy is their life: he that defraudeth him thereof is a man of blood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_22">22&#160;</span>He that taketh away his neighbour’s living slayeth him; and <a href='#FN1117'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>he that defraudeth the labourer of his hire is a bloodshedder. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_23">23&#160;</span>When one buildeth, and another pulleth down, what profit have they then but labour? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_24">24&#160;</span>When one prayeth, and another curseth, whose voice will the <a href='#FN1118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Lord hear? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>He that washeth himself after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it again, what availeth his washing? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_26">26&#160;</span>So is it with a man <a href='#FN1120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>that fasteth for his sins, and <a href='#FN1121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>goeth again, and doeth the same: who will hear his prayer? or what doth his humbling profit him?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>He that keepeth the law bringeth offerings enough: he that <a href='#FN1123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>taketh heed to the commandment <a href='#FN1124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>offereth a peace offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_2">2&#160;</span>He that requiteth a goodturn <a href='#FN1125'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>offereth fine flour; and he that giveth alms <a href='#FN1126'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>sacrificeth praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_3">3&#160;</span>To depart from wickedness is a thing pleasing to the Lord; and to forsake unrighteousness is a propitiation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Thou shalt not appear empty before the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_5">5&#160;</span>For all these things <span class='add'>are to be done</span> because of the commandment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_6">6&#160;</span>The offering of the righteous maketh the altar fat, and the <a href='#FN1128'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>sweet savour thereof is before the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_7">7&#160;</span>The sacrifice of a just man is acceptable, and <a href='#FN1129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the memorial thereof shall never be forgotten. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_8">8&#160;</span>Give the Lord his honour with a <a href='#FN1130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>good eye, and diminish not <a href='#FN1131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>the firstfruits of thine hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_9">9&#160;</span>In all thy gifts <a href='#FN1132'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>shew a cheerful countenance, and <a href='#FN1133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dedicate thy <a href='#FN1134'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>tithes with gladness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Give unto the most High according as he hath enriched thee; and <a href='#FN1136'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>as thou hast gotten, give with a <a href='#FN1137'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>cheerful eye. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>For the Lord recompenseth, and will give thee <a href='#FN1139'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>seven times as much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN1140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Do not think to corrupt with gifts; for <a href='#FN1141'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>such he will not receive: and <a href='#FN1142'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>trust not to unrighteous sacrifices; for <a href='#FN1143'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the Lord is judge, and <a href='#FN1144'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>with him is no respect of persons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN1145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>He will not accept any person against a poor man, but will hear the prayer of the oppressed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_14">14&#160;</span>He will not despise the supplication of <a href='#FN1146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the fatherless; nor <a href='#FN1147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the widow, when she poureth out her complaint. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_15">15&#160;</span>Do not the tears run down the widow’s cheeks? and is not <a href='#FN1148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a><a href='#FN1149'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>her cry against him that causeth them to fall? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_16">16&#160;</span>He that serveth the Lord shall be accepted with favour, and his prayer shall reach unto the clouds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_17">17&#160;</span>The prayer of the humble pierceth the clouds: and till it come nigh, he will not be comforted; and <a href='#FN1150'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>will not depart, till the most High shall behold to judge righteously, and execute judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_18">18&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the Lord will not be slack, neither will the Mighty <a href='#FN1152'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>be patient toward them, till he have smitten in sunder the loins of the unmerciful, and repayed vengeance to the heathen; till he have taken away the multitude of the <a href='#FN1153'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>proud, and broken the sceptre of the unrighteous; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_19">19&#160;</span>Till he have <a href='#FN1154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>rendered to every man according to his deeds, and to the works of men according to their devices; till he have judged the cause of his people, and made them to rejoice in his mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_20">20&#160;</span>Mercy is <a href='#FN1155'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>seasonable in the time of affliction, as <a href='#FN1156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>clouds of rain in the time of drought.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1157' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Have mercy upon us, O Lord God of all, and behold us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_2">2&#160;</span>And send thy fear upon all the nations that seek not after thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1158' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Lift up thy hand <a href='#FN1159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against the strange nations, and let them see thy power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_4">4&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN1160'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a><a href='#FN1161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>thou wast sanctified in us before them: so <a href='#FN1162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>be thou magnified among them before us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_5">5&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a><a href='#FN1164'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>let them know thee, as we have known thee, that there is no God but only thou, O God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_6">6&#160;</span>Shew new signs, and <a href='#FN1165'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>make other strange wonders: glorify <a href='#FN1166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>thy hand and thy right arm, that they may set forth thy wondrous works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_7">7&#160;</span>Raise up indignation, and <a href='#FN1167'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>pour out wrath: take away the adversary, and destroy the enemy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN1168' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Make the time short, remember the <a href='#FN1169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>covenant, and let them declare thy wonderful works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_9">9&#160;</span>Let <a href='#FN1170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of the fire; and let them perish that oppress the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1171' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Smite in sunder the heads of the rulers of the heathen, that say, There is none other but we. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1172' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, and <a href='#FN1173'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>inherit thou them, as from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_12">12&#160;</span>O Lord, have mercy upon <a href='#FN1174'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the people that <a href='#FN1175'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>is called by thy name, and upon Israel, whom thou hast named <a href='#FN1176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>thy firstborn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_13">13&#160;</span>O be merciful unto Jerusalem, thy <a href='#FN1177'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>holy city, <a href='#FN1178'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the place of thy rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_14">14&#160;</span>Fill Sion <a href='#FN1179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>with thine unspeakable oracles, and thy people with thy glory: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_15">15&#160;</span>Give testimony unto those that thou hast possessed from the beginning, and raise up <a href='#FN1180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets that have been in thy name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_16">16&#160;</span>Reward <a href='#FN1181'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>them that wait for thee, and let thy prophets be found faithful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_17">17&#160;</span>O Lord, hear the prayer of thy <a href='#FN1182'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>servants, according to <a href='#FN1183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the blessing of Aaron over thy people, that <a href='#FN1184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a><a href='#FN1185'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>all they which dwell upon the earth may know that thou art the Lord, <a href='#FN1186'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the eternal God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN1187' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>The belly devoureth all meats, yet is one meat better than another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1188' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>As the palate tasteth divers kinds of venison: so doth an heart of understanding false speeches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_20">20&#160;</span>A froward heart causeth heaviness: but <a href='#FN1189'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>a man of experience will recompense him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN1190' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>A woman will receive every man, yet is one daughter better than another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_22">22&#160;</span>The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance, and <a href='#FN1191'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>a man loveth nothing better. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_23">23&#160;</span>If there be kindness, meekness, and comfort, in her tongue, then is not her husband <a href='#FN1192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>like <a href='#FN1193'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>other men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_24">24&#160;</span>He that getteth a wife beginneth <a href='#FN1194'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a possession, <a href='#FN1195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>a help <a href='#FN1196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>like unto himself, and a pillar of rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1197' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Where no hedge is, there the possession is spoiled: and he that hath no wife will wander up and down mourning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_26">26&#160;</span>Who will trust <a href='#FN1198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a thief well appointed, that skippeth from city to city? so <span class='add'>who will believe</span> a man that hath no house, and <a href='#FN1199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>lodgeth wheresoever the night taketh him?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_1">1&#160;</span>Every friend saith, I am his friend also: but there is a friend, which is only a friend in name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_2">2&#160;</span>Is it not a grief unto death, when a companion and friend is turned to an enemy? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_3">3&#160;</span>O wicked imagination, whence camest thou in to cover the earth with deceit? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1200' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>There is a companion, which rejoiceth in the prosperity of a friend, but in the time of trouble will be against him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_5">5&#160;</span>There is a companion, which helpeth his friend for the belly, and taketh up the buckler <a href='#FN1201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against the enemy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_6">6&#160;</span>Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful of him <a href='#FN1202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in thy riches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_7">7&#160;</span>Every counsellor extolleth counsel; but there is some that counselleth for himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_8">8&#160;</span>Beware of a counsellor, and know before <a href='#FN1203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>what need he hath; for he will counsel for himself; lest he <a href='#FN1204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>cast the lot upon thee, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_9">9&#160;</span>And say unto thee, Thy way is good: and afterward he stand on the other side, to see what shall befall thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_10">10&#160;</span>Consult not with one that suspecteth thee: and hide thy counsel from such as envy thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_11">11&#160;</span>Neither consult with <a href='#FN1205'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a woman touching her of whom she is jealous; neither with a coward in matters of war; nor <a href='#FN1206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>with a merchant concerning exchange; nor with a buyer of selling; nor with an envious man of thankfulness; nor with an unmerciful man touching kindness; nor with the slothful for any work; nor with an hireling for a year of finishing work; nor with an idle servant of much business: <a href='#FN1207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>hearken not unto these in any matter of counsel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_12">12&#160;</span>But be continually with a godly man, whom thou knowest to keep the commandments of the Lord, whose, mind is <a href='#FN1208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>according to thy mind, and <a href='#FN1209'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>will sorrow with thee, if thou shalt miscarry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_13">13&#160;</span>And let the counsel of thine own heart stand: for there is no man more faithful unto thee than it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_14">14&#160;</span>For a man’s mind is sometime wont to tell him more than <a href='#FN1210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>seven <a href='#FN1211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>watchmen, that sit above in an high tower. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_15">15&#160;</span>And above all this pray to the most High, that he will direct thy way in truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_16">16&#160;</span>Let reason go before every enterprize, and counsel before every action. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_17">17&#160;</span>The countenance is a sign of changing of the heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN1212' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Four manner of things appear: good and evil, life and death: but <a href='#FN1213'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>the tongue ruleth over them continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_19">19&#160;</span>There is one that is <a href='#FN1214'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>wise and teacheth many, and <a href='#FN1215'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>yet is <a href='#FN1216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>unprofitable to himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_20">20&#160;</span>There is one that sheweth wisdom in words, and is hated: he shall be destitute of all <a href='#FN1217'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>food. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_21">21&#160;</span>For grace is not given, him from the Lord, because he is deprived of all wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN1218' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Another is wise to himself; and the fruits of understanding are commendable in his mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_23">23&#160;</span>A wise man instructeth his people; and the fruits of his understanding fail not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_24">24&#160;</span>A wise man shall be filled with blessing; and all they that see him <a href='#FN1219'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>shall count him happy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_25">25&#160;</span>The days of the life of man may be numbered: but the days of Israel are innumerable. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_26">26&#160;</span>A wise man <a href='#FN1220'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shall inherit <a href='#FN1221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>glory among his people, and his name shall be perpetual. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_27">27&#160;</span>My son, prove thy soul in thy life, and see what is evil for it, and give not that unto it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_28">28&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1223'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>all things are not profitable for all men, neither hath every soul pleasure in every thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN1224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Be not unsatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon meats: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_30">30&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1225'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>excess of meats bringeth <a href='#FN1226'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>sickness, and <a href='#FN1227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>surfeiting will turn into choler. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_31">31&#160;</span>By surfeiting have many perished; but he that taketh heed prolongeth his life.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_1">1&#160;</span>Honour a physician with the <a href='#FN1228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>honour due unto him for the <a href='#FN1229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>uses which ye may have of him: <a href='#FN1230'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>for the Lord hath created him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_2">2&#160;</span>For of the most High cometh healing, and he shall receive <a href='#FN1231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1232'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>honour of the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_3">3&#160;</span>The skill of the physician shall lift up his head: and in the sight of great men he shall be in admiration. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_4">4&#160;</span>The Lord hath created medicines out of the earth; and he that is wise will not abhor them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN1233' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Was not the water made sweet with wood, that the virtue thereof might be known? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_6">6&#160;</span>And he hath given men skill, that he might be honoured in his marvellous works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_7">7&#160;</span>With such doth he heal <span class='add'>men</span>, and taketh away their pains. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_8">8&#160;</span>Of such doth the apothecary make a <a href='#FN1234'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>confection; and of his works there is no end; and from him is <a href='#FN1235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>peace over all the earth, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_9">9&#160;</span>My son, in thy sickness be not negligent: but <a href='#FN1236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1237' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Leave off from sin, and order thine hands aright, and <a href='#FN1238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>cleanse thy heart from all wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_11">11&#160;</span>Give a <a href='#FN1239'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>sweet savour, and a memorial of <a href='#FN1240'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>fine flour; and make a fat offering, <a href='#FN1241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as not being. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_12">12&#160;</span>Then <a href='#FN1242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>give place to the physician, <a href='#FN1243'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>for the Lord hath created him: let him not go from thee, for thou hast <a href='#FN1244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>need of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_13">13&#160;</span>There is a time when in their hands there is <a href='#FN1245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>good success. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_14">14&#160;</span>For they shall also pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that, which they give for <a href='#FN1246'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>ease and <a href='#FN1247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>remedy to prolong life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN1248' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the hand of the physician. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_16">16&#160;</span>My son, <a href='#FN1249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>let tears fall down over the dead, and begin to lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm thyself; and then cover his body according to the custom, and neglect not his burial. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_17">17&#160;</span>Weep bitterly, and make great moan, and use lamentation, as he is worthy, and that a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken of: and then comfort thyself for thy heaviness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_18">18&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>of heaviness cometh death, and <a href='#FN1251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the heaviness of the heart breaketh strength. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_19">19&#160;</span>In <a href='#FN1252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>affliction also sorrow remaineth: and the life of the poor is the curse of the heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_20">20&#160;</span>Take no heaviness to heart: drive it away, and <a href='#FN1253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>remember the last end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_21">21&#160;</span>Forget it not, for there is no turning again: thou shalt not do him good, but hurt thyself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_22">22&#160;</span>Remember <a href='#FN1254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>my judgment: for thine also shall be so; yesterday for me, and to day for thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1255' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest; and be comforted for him, when his Spirit is departed from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_24">24&#160;</span>The wisdom of a <a href='#FN1256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure: and he that hath little business shall become wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_25">25&#160;</span>How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough, and that glorieth in the goad, that driveth oxen, and is occupied in their labours, and whose <a href='#FN1257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>talk is <a href='#FN1258'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of bullocks? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_26">26&#160;</span>He giveth his mind to make furrows; and is diligent to give the kine fodder. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_27">27&#160;</span>So every carpenter and <a href='#FN1259'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>workmaster, that laboureth night and day: and they that cut and grave seals, and are diligent to <a href='#FN1260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>make great variety, and <a href='#FN1261'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>give themselves to counterfeit imagery, and <a href='#FN1262'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>watch to finish a work: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN1263' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>The smith also sitting by the anvil, and considering the iron work, the vapour of the fire wasteth his flesh, and he fighteth with the heat of the furnace: the noise of the hammer and the anvil is ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the pattern of the thing that he maketh; <a href='#FN1264'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>he setteth his mind to finish his work, and <a href='#FN1265'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>watcheth to polish it <a href='#FN1266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>perfectly: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_29">29&#160;</span>So doth the potter sitting at his work, and <a href='#FN1267'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>turning the wheel about with his feet, who is alway carefully set at his work, and maketh all his work by number; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_30">30&#160;</span>He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and <a href='#FN1268'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>boweth down his strength before his feet; <a href='#FN1269'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>he applieth himself to lead it over; and <a href='#FN1270'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>he is diligent to make clean the furnace: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_31">31&#160;</span>All these trust to their hands: and every one is wise in his work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_32">32&#160;</span>Without these cannot a city be inhabited: and they shall not dwell where they will, nor go up and down: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_33">33&#160;</span>They shall not be sought for in publick counsel, nor sit high in the congregation: they shall not sit on the judges’ seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment: they cannot declare justice and judgment; and <a href='#FN1271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>they shall not be found where parables are spoken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_34">34&#160;</span>But they will maintain the state of the world, and <span class='add'>all</span> their desire is in the work of their craft.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_1">1&#160;</span>But he that giveth his mind to the law of the most High, and is occupied in the meditation thereof, will seek out the wisdom of all the ancient, and <a href='#FN1272'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>be occupied in prophecies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_2">2&#160;</span>He will keep the sayings of the renowned men: and <a href='#FN1273'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>where subtil parables are, he will be there also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_3">3&#160;</span>He will seek out the secrets of <a href='#FN1274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>grave sentences, and be conversant in <a href='#FN1275'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>dark parables. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_4">4&#160;</span>He shall serve among great men, and <a href='#FN1276'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>appear before princes: he will travel through strange countries; for he hath tried the good and the evil among men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_5">5&#160;</span>He will give his heart <a href='#FN1277'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>to resort early to the Lord that made him, and will pray before the most High, and will open his mouth in prayer, and make supplication for his sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1278' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>When the great Lord will, <a href='#FN1279'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>he shall be filled with the spirit of understanding: he shall <a href='#FN1280'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>pour out wise sentences, and give thanks unto the Lord in his prayer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_7">7&#160;</span>He shall direct his counsel and knowledge, and in his secrets shall he meditate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_8">8&#160;</span>He shall shew forth that which he hath learned, and shall glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN1281' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Many shall commend his understanding; and so long as the world endureth, <a href='#FN1282'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>it shall not be blotted out; <a href='#FN1283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>his memorial shall not depart away, and his name shall live from generation to generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1284' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Nations shall shew forth his wisdom, <a href='#FN1285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>and the congregation shall declare his praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_11">11&#160;</span>If he die, he shall leave a greater name than a thousand: and if he live, he shall <a href='#FN1286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>increase it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_12">12&#160;</span>Yet have I more to say, which <a href='#FN1287'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>I have thought upon; for I am filled as the moon at the full. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_13">13&#160;</span>Hearken unto me, ye holy children, and bud forth <a href='#FN1288'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>as a rose growing by the <a href='#FN1289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>brook of the field: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_14">14&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1290'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>give ye a sweet savour as <a href='#FN1291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>frankincense, and flourish as a <a href='#FN1292'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>lily, send forth a smell, and sing a song of praise, bless the Lord in all his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_15">15&#160;</span>Magnify his name, and shew forth his praise with the songs of your lips, and with <a href='#FN1293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>harps, and in praising him ye shall say after this manner: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1294' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>All the works of the Lord are exceeding good, and <a href='#FN1295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>whatsoever he commandeth shall be accomplished in due season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>And none may say, What is this? wherefore is that? for at time convenient they shall all be sought out: <a href='#FN1297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>at his commandment the waters stood as an heap, and at the words of his mouth the receptacles of waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN1298' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>At his commandment is done whatsoever pleaseth him; and <a href='#FN1299'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>none can hinder, when he will save. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1300' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>The works of all flesh are before him, and nothing can be hid from his eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_20">20&#160;</span>He seeth from everlasting to everlasting; and there is nothing <a href='#FN1301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>wonderful before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_21">21&#160;</span>A man need not to say, What is this? wherefore is that? for he hath made all things for their uses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_22">22&#160;</span>His blessing covered the dry land as a river, and <a href='#FN1302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>watered it as a flood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_23">23&#160;</span>As he hath turned the waters into saltness: so shall the heathen inherit his wrath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_24">24&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN1303'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>his ways are plain unto the holy; so are they stumblingblocks unto the wicked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_25">25&#160;</span>For the good are good things created from the beginning: <a href='#FN1304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>so evil things for sinners. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN1305' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>The principal things for the whole use of man’s life are <a href='#FN1306'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>water, fire, iron, and salt, <a href='#FN1307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>flour of wheat, honey, milk, and <a href='#FN1308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the blood of the grape, and oil, and <a href='#FN1309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>clothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN1310' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>All these things are for good to the godly: so to the sinners they are turned into evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_28">28&#160;</span>There be spirits that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay on sore strokes; in the time of destruction they pour out their force, and appease the wrath of him that made them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN1311' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Fire, and <a href='#FN1312'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>hail, and <a href='#FN1313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>famine, and <a href='#FN1314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>death, all these were created for vengeance; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN1315' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Teeth of <a href='#FN1316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>wild beasts, and <a href='#FN1317'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>scorpions, <a href='#FN1318'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a><a href='#FN1319'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>serpents, and <a href='#FN1320'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the sword punishing the wicked to destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN1321' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>They shall rejoice in his commandment, and they shall be ready upon earth, when need is; and when their time is come, they shall not transgress his word. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_32">32&#160;</span>Therefore from the beginning I was resolved, and <a href='#FN1322'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>thought upon these things, and have left them in writing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_33">33&#160;</span><a href='#FN1323' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>All the works of the Lord are good: and he will give every needful thing in due season. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_34">34&#160;</span>So that a man cannot say, This is worse than that: for in time they shall all be well approved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_35">35&#160;</span>And therefore praise ye the Lord with the whole heart and mouth, and bless the name of the Lord.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1324' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Great travail is created for every man, and an heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of their mother’s womb, <a href='#FN1325'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>till the day that they return to the mother of all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_2">2&#160;</span>Their imagination of <a href='#FN1326'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>things to come, and the day of death, <span class='add'>trouble</span> their thoughts, and <span class='add'>cause</span> <a href='#FN1327'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>fear of heart; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, unto him that is humbled in <a href='#FN1329'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>earth and ashes; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>From him that weareth <a href='#FN1331'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>purple and a crown, <a href='#FN1332'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>unto him that is clothed with a linen frock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_5">5&#160;</span>Wrath, and envy, trouble, and unquietness, fear of death, and anger, and strife, and in the time of rest upon his bed his night sleep, do change his knowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_6">6&#160;</span>A little or nothing is his rest, and afterward he is in his sleep, as in a day of keeping watch, <a href='#FN1333'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>troubled in the vision of his heart, as if he were escaped out of a battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_7">7&#160;</span>When all is safe, he awaketh, and marvelleth that the fear was nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Such things happen</span> unto all flesh, <a href='#FN1334'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>both man and beast, and that is <a href='#FN1335'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>sevenfold more upon sinners. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN1336' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Death, and bloodshed, strife, and <a href='#FN1337'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>sword, <a href='#FN1338'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>calamities, <a href='#FN1339'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>famine, <a href='#FN1340'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>tribulation, and the scourge; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1341' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>These things are created for the wicked, and <a href='#FN1342'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>for their sakes came the flood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1343' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>All things that are of the earth shall turn to the earth again: and that which is <a href='#FN1344'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>of the waters doth return into the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_12">12&#160;</span>All <a href='#FN1345'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>bribery and injustice shall be blotted out: but true dealing shall endure for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_13">13&#160;</span>The goods of the unjust <a href='#FN1346'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>shall be dried up like a river, and <a href='#FN1347'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shall vanish with noise, like a great thunder in rain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_14">14&#160;</span>While <a href='#FN1348'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>he openeth his hand he shall rejoice: so shall transgressors come to nought. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_15">15&#160;</span>The children of the ungodly shall not bring forth many branches: but are as <a href='#FN1349'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>unclean roots upon a hard rock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>The <a href='#FN1351'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>weed growing upon every water and bank of a river <a href='#FN1352'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>shall be pulled up before all grass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_17">17&#160;</span>Bountifulness is as <a href='#FN1353'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a most fruitful garden, and mercifulness endureth for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_18">18&#160;</span>To labour, and <a href='#FN1354'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>to be content with that a man hath, is a sweet life: but he that findeth <a href='#FN1355'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>a treasure is above them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_19">19&#160;</span>Children and the building of a city continue a man’s name: but a blameless wife is counted above them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN1356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Wine and musick rejoice the heart: but the love of wisdom is above them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_21">21&#160;</span>The pipe and the <a href='#FN1357'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>psaltery make sweet melody: but a pleasant tongue is above them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_22">22&#160;</span>Thine eye desireth favour and beauty: but more than both corn while it is green. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_23">23&#160;</span>A friend and companion never meet amiss: but above both is a wife with her husband. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_24">24&#160;</span>Brethren and help are against time of trouble: but <a href='#FN1358'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>alms shall deliver more than them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_25">25&#160;</span>Gold and silver make the foot stand sure: but counsel is esteemed above them both. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN1359' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Riches and strength lift up the heart: but <a href='#FN1360'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the fear of the Lord is above them both: there is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it needeth not to seek help. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_27">27&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is <a href='#FN1361'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a fruitful garden, and <a href='#FN1362'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>covereth him above all glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_28">28&#160;</span>My son, lead not a beggar’s life; for <a href='#FN1363'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>better it is to die than to beg. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_29">29&#160;</span>The life of him that dependeth on another man’s table is not to be counted for a life; for he <a href='#FN1364'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>polluteth himself with other men’s meat: but a wise man well nurtured will beware thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_30">30&#160;</span>Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless: but in his belly there shall burn a fire.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_1">1&#160;</span>O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that liveth at rest in his possessions, unto the man <a href='#FN1365'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>that hath nothing to vex him, and that hath prosperity in all things: yea, unto him that is yet able to receive meat! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_2">2&#160;</span>O death, acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy, and unto him whose strength faileth, <a href='#FN1366'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>that is now in the last age, and <a href='#FN1367'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>is vexed with all things, and to him that <a href='#FN1368'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>despaireth, and <a href='#FN1369'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>hath lost patience! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_3">3&#160;</span>Fear not the sentence of death, remember them that have been before thee, and that come after; for this is the sentence of the Lord over all flesh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_4">4&#160;</span>And why art thou against the pleasure of the most High? there is no inquisition in the grave, whether thou have lived ten, or an hundred, or a thousand years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_5">5&#160;</span>The children of sinners are abominable children, and they that are conversant in the dwelling of the ungodly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1370' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>The inheritance of sinners’ children shall perish, and their posterity shall have a perpetual reproach. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_7">7&#160;</span>The children will complain of an ungodly father, <a href='#FN1371'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>because they shall be reproached for his sake. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_8">8&#160;</span>Woe be unto you, ungodly men, which have forsaken the law of the most high God! for if ye increase, it shall be to your destruction: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_9">9&#160;</span>And if ye be born, ye shall be born to a curse: and if ye die, a curse shall be your portion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1372' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>All that are of the earth shall turn to earth again: so the ungodly shall go from a curse to destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_11">11&#160;</span>The mourning of men is about their bodies: but <a href='#FN1373'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>an ill name of sinners shall be blotted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_12">12&#160;</span>Have regard to thy name; for <a href='#FN1374'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>that shall continue with thee above a thousand great treasures of gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_13">13&#160;</span>A good life hath but <a href='#FN1375'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>few days: but a good name endureth for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_14">14&#160;</span>My children, keep discipline in peace: for <a href='#FN1376'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in them both? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN1377' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>A man that hideth his foolishness is better <a href='#FN1378'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>than a man that hideth his wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore be shamefaced according to my word: <a href='#FN1379'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>for it is not good to retain all shamefacedness; <a href='#FN1380'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>neither is it altogether approved in every thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_17">17&#160;</span>Be ashamed of whoredom <a href='#FN1381'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before father and mother: and of a lie <a href='#FN1382'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before a prince and a mighty man; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_18">18&#160;</span>Of an offence <a href='#FN1383'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before a judge and ruler; of iniquity <a href='#FN1384'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before a congregation and people; of unjust dealing <a href='#FN1385'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before thy partner and friend; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_19">19&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1386'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>of theft <a href='#FN1387'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>in regard of the place where thou sojournest, and <a href='#FN1388'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>in regard of <a href='#FN1389'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the truth of God and his covenant; and <a href='#FN1390'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to lean with thine elbow upon the meat; and <a href='#FN1391'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>of scorning to give and take; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_20">20&#160;</span>And of silence <a href='#FN1392'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before them that salute thee; and <a href='#FN1393'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to look upon an harlot; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_21">21&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1394'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to turn away thy face from thy kinsman; or <a href='#FN1395'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to take away a portion or a gift; or <a href='#FN1396'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>to <a href='#FN1397'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>gaze upon <a href='#FN1398'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>another man’s wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_22">22&#160;</span>Or to be overbusy with his maid, and come not near her bed; or <a href='#FN1399'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>of upbraiding speeches <a href='#FN1400'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>before friends; and <a href='#FN1401'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>after thou hast given, upbraid not; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_23">23&#160;</span>Or <a href='#FN1402'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>of <a href='#FN1403'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>iterating and speaking again that which thou hast heard; and <a href='#FN1404'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>of <a href='#FN1405'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>revealing of secrets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_24">24&#160;</span>So shalt thou be truly shamefaced and <a href='#FN1406'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>find favour before all men.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1407' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Of these things be not thou ashamed, and <a href='#FN1408'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>accept no person to sin thereby: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1409' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Of the law of the most High, and his covenant; and of judgment to justify the ungodly; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1410' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Of reckoning with thy partners and <a href='#FN1411'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>travellers; or <a href='#FN1412'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of the gift of the heritage of friends; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1413' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Of exactness of balance and weights; or <a href='#FN1414'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>of getting much or little; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_5">5&#160;</span>And of merchants’ <a href='#FN1415'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>indifferent selling; of much <a href='#FN1416'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>correction of children; and <a href='#FN1417'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>to make the side of an evil servant to bleed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_6">6&#160;</span>Sure keeping is good, where an evil wife is; and shut up, where many hands are. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN1418' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Deliver all things in number and weight; and put all in writing that thou <a href='#FN1419'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>givest out, or receivest in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN1420' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Be not ashamed to <a href='#FN1421'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>inform the unwise and foolish, and <a href='#FN1422'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the extreme aged <a href='#FN1423'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that contendeth with those that are young: thus shalt thou be truly learned, and approved of all men living. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN1424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>The father waketh for the daughter, when no man knoweth; and the care for her taketh away sleep: when she is young, lest she <a href='#FN1425'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>pass away the flower of her age; and being married, lest she should be hated: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_10">10&#160;</span>In her virginity, <a href='#FN1426'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>lest she should be defiled and gotten with child in her father’s house; and having an husband, lest she should misbehave herself; and when she is married, lest she should be barren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1427' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter, lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_12">12&#160;</span>Behold not every body’s beauty, and <a href='#FN1428'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>sit not in the midst of women. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_13">13&#160;</span>For from garments cometh a moth, and <a href='#FN1429'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>from women wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_14">14&#160;</span>Better is the <a href='#FN1430'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>churlishness of a man than a <a href='#FN1431'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>courteous woman, a woman, I say, which bringeth shame and reproach. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_15">15&#160;</span>I will now remember the works of the Lord, and declare the things that I have seen: <a href='#FN1432'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>In the words of the Lord are his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_16">16&#160;</span>The sun that giveth light looketh upon all things, and the work thereof is full of the glory of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1433' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>The Lord hath not given power to the saints to declare all his marvellous works, which the <a href='#FN1434'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Almighty Lord firmly settled, that whatsoever is might be established for his glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_18">18&#160;</span>He seeketh out the deep, and the heart, and considereth their <a href='#FN1435'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>crafty devices: for <a href='#FN1436'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the Lord knoweth all that may be known, and he beholdeth <a href='#FN1437'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the signs of the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1438' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>He declareth the things that are past, and for to come, and revealeth the steps of hidden things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN1439' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>No thought escapeth him, neither any word is hidden from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN1440' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>He hath garnished <a href='#FN1441'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the excellent works of his wisdom, and he is from everlasting to everlasting: <a href='#FN1442'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>unto him may nothing be added, neither can he be diminished, and <a href='#FN1443'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>he hath no need of any counsellor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_22">22&#160;</span>Oh how desirable are all his works! and that a man may see even to a spark. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_23">23&#160;</span>All these things live and remain for ever for all uses, and <a href='#FN1444'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>they are all obedient. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN1445' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>All things are double one against another: and he hath made nothing imperfect. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_25">25&#160;</span>One thing establisheth the good or another: and who shall be filled with beholding his glory?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR43_0'> 43</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_1">1&#160;</span>The pride of the height, the clear firmament, the beauty of heaven, with his glorious shew; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_2">2&#160;</span>The sun when it appeareth, declaring at his rising a marvellous <a href='#FN1446'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>instrument, the work of the most High: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_3">3&#160;</span>At noon it parcheth the country, and who can abide the burning heat thereof? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_4">4&#160;</span>A man blowing a furnace is in works of heat, but the sun burneth the mountains three times more; breathing out fiery vapours, and sending forth bright beams, it dimmeth the eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_5">5&#160;</span>Great is the Lord that made it; and at his commandment <a href='#FN1447'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1448'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>runneth hastily. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1449' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>He made the moon also to serve in her season for a declaration of times, and <a href='#FN1450'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>a sign of the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN1451' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>From the moon is the sign of feasts, a light that decreaseth in her perfection. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_8">8&#160;</span>The month is called <a href='#FN1452'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>after her name, increasing wonderfully in her changing, being an instrument of the <a href='#FN1453'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>armies above, shining in the firmament of heaven; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_9">9&#160;</span>The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, an ornament giving light <a href='#FN1454'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>in the highest places of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_10">10&#160;</span>At the commandment of the Holy One they will stand in their order, and never faint <a href='#FN1455'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in their watches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1456' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Look upon the <a href='#FN1457'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>rainbow, and praise him that made it; very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_12">12&#160;</span>It compasseth the heaven about with a glorious circle, and <a href='#FN1458'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>the hands of the most High have bended it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN1459' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>By his commandment he <a href='#FN1460'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>maketh the snow to fall aplace, and sendeth swiftly the lightnings of his judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_14">14&#160;</span>Through this <a href='#FN1461'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the treasures are opened: and clouds fly forth as fowls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_15">15&#160;</span>By his great power he maketh the clouds firm, and <a href='#FN1462'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the hailstones are broken small. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1463' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>At his sight the mountains are shaken, and at his will the south wind bloweth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>The noise of the thunder maketh the earth <a href='#FN1465'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to tremble: so doth the northern storm and the whirlwind: <a href='#FN1466'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>as birds flying he scattereth the snow, and the falling down thereof is as the lighting of <a href='#FN1467'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>grasshoppers: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_18">18&#160;</span>The eye marvelleth at the beauty of the whiteness thereof, and the heart is astonished at the raining of it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1468' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>The hoarfrost also as salt he poureth on the earth, and being congealed, <a href='#FN1469'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it lieth on the top of sharp stakes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_20">20&#160;</span>When the cold north wind bloweth, and the water is congealed into ice, it abideth upon every <a href='#FN1470'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>gathering together of water, and clotheth the water as with a breastplate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_21">21&#160;</span>It devoureth the mountains, and burneth the wilderness, and consumeth the grass as fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_22">22&#160;</span>A present remedy of all is a mist coming speedily, a dew coming <a href='#FN1471'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>after heat refresheth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_23">23&#160;</span>By his counsel he appeaseth the deep, and planteth islands therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN1472' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>They that <a href='#FN1473'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>sail on the sea tell of the danger thereof; and when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1474' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>For therein be <a href='#FN1475'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>strange and wondrous works, variety of all kinds of beasts and whales created. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_26">26&#160;</span>By him the end of them hath <a href='#FN1476'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>prosperous success, and <a href='#FN1477'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>by his word all things consist. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_27">27&#160;</span>We may speak much, and yet <a href='#FN1478'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>come short: wherefore in sum, he is all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN1479' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>How shall we be able to magnify him? for he is great above all his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN1480' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>The Lord is terrible and very great, and marvellous is his power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_30">30&#160;</span>When ye glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as ye can; for even yet will he far exceed: and when ye exalt him, put forth all your strength, and be not weary; for ye can never go far enough. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_31">31&#160;</span><a href='#FN1481' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Who hath <a href='#FN1482'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>seen him, that he might tell us? and who can magnify him as he is? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_32">32&#160;</span><a href='#FN1483' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>There are yet hid greater things than these be, for we have seen but a few of his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_33">33&#160;</span>For the Lord hath made all things; and to the godly hath he given wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR44_0'> 44</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1484' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let us now praise famous men, and our fathers that begat us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_2">2&#160;</span>The Lord hath wrought great glory by them through his great power from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_3">3&#160;</span>Such as did bear rule in their kingdoms, men renowned for their power, giving counsel by their understanding, and <a href='#FN1485'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>declaring prophecies: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_4">4&#160;</span>Leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their knowledge of learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent are their instructions: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN1486' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Such as found out musical tunes, and recited <a href='#FN1487'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>verses in writing: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_6">6&#160;</span>Rich men furnished with <a href='#FN1488'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>ability, living peaceably in their habitations: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_7">7&#160;</span>All these were honoured in their generations, and were the glory of their times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_8">8&#160;</span>There be of them, that have left a name behind them, that their praises might be reported. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_9">9&#160;</span>And some there be, which have no memorial; <a href='#FN1489'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>who are perished, <a href='#FN1490'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>as though they had never been; and are become as though they had never been born; and their children after them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_10">10&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN1491'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>these were merciful men, whose righteousness hath not been forgotten. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1492' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>With their seed shall continually remain a good inheritance, and their children are <a href='#FN1493'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>within the covenant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN1494' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Their seed standeth fast, and their children <a href='#FN1495'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for their sakes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_13">13&#160;</span>Their seed shall remain for ever, and <a href='#FN1496'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>their glory shall not be blotted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_14">14&#160;</span>Their bodies are buried in peace; but their name liveth for evermore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN1497' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>The people will tell of their wisdom, and <a href='#FN1498'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the congregation will shew forth their praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1499' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Enoch pleased the Lord, and was translated, being an example of repentance to all generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1500' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Noah was found perfect and righteous; in the time of wrath he was taken in exchange <span class='add'>for the world;</span> therefore was he left as a remnant unto the earth, when the flood came. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN1501' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>An everlasting covenant was made with him, that all flesh should perish no more by the flood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Abraham was a great father of many people: in glory was there none like unto him; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_20">20&#160;</span>Who kept the law of the most High, and was <a href='#FN1503'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>in covenant with him: <a href='#FN1504'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>he established the covenant in his flesh; and <a href='#FN1505'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>when he was proved, he was found faithful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN1506'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>he assured him by an oath, that he would bless the nations in his seed, and that he would multiply him as the dust of the earth, and exalt his seed as the stars, and <a href='#FN1507'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>cause them to inherit from sea to sea, and <a href='#FN1508'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>from the river unto the utmost part of the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN1509' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>With Isaac did he establish likewise <span class='add'>for Abraham his father’s sake</span> the blessing of all men, and the covenant,
<span class="verse" id="SR44_23">23&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1510'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>made it rest upon the head of Jacob. He acknowledged him in his blessing, and <a href='#FN1511'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>gave him an heritage, and <a href='#FN1512'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>divided his portions; among the twelve tribes did he part them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR45_0'> 45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_1">1&#160;</span>And he brought <a href='#FN1513'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>out of him a merciful man, which <a href='#FN1514'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>found favour in the sight of all flesh, even Moses, <a href='#FN1515'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>beloved of God and men, <a href='#FN1516'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>bb</a>whose memorial is blessed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_2">2&#160;</span>He made him like to the glorious saints, and magnified him, so that his enemies stood in fear of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_3">3&#160;</span>By his words <a href='#FN1517'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>he caused the wonders to cease, and <a href='#FN1518'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>he made him glorious in the sight of kings, and <a href='#FN1519'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>gave him a commandment for his people, and <a href='#FN1520'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>shewed him part of his glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_4">4&#160;</span>He sanctified him in his <a href='#FN1521'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ff</a>faithfulness and <a href='#FN1522'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>meekness, and chose him out of all men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_5">5&#160;</span>He made him to hear his voice, and <a href='#FN1523'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>brought him into the dark cloud, and <a href='#FN1524'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>gave him commandments before his face, even the law of life and knowledge, that he might teach Jacob his covenants, and Israel his judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_6">6&#160;</span>He exalted <a href='#FN1525'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Aaron, an holy man like unto him, even his brother, <a href='#FN1526'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>of the tribe of Levi. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_7">7&#160;</span>An everlasting covenant he made with him and <a href='#FN1527'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>gave him the priesthood among the people; <a href='#FN1528'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>he beautified him with comely ornaments, and clothed him with a robe of glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_8">8&#160;</span>He put upon him perfect glory; and strengthened him with <a href='#FN1529'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>rich <a href='#FN1530'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>garments, with <a href='#FN1531'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>breeches, with <a href='#FN1532'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a long robe, and <a href='#FN1533'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the ephod. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_9">9&#160;</span>And he compassed him with <a href='#FN1534'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>pomegranates, and with many golden bells round about, <a href='#FN1535'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>that as he went there might be a sound, and <a href='#FN1536'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>a noise made that might be heard in the temple, for a memorial to the children of his people; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1537' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>With an holy garment, with gold, and <a href='#FN1538'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>blue silk, and <a href='#FN1539'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a><a href='#FN1540'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>purple, the work of the embroiderer, <a href='#FN1541'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>with a breastplate of judgment, and <a href='#FN1542'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>with Urim and Thummim; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_11">11&#160;</span>With <a href='#FN1543'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>twisted scarlet, the work of the cunning workman, <a href='#FN1544'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>with precious stones graven like seals, and set in gold, the work of the jeweller, with a writing engraved for a memorial, after the number of the tribes of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN1545' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>He set <a href='#FN1546'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>a crown of gold upon the <a href='#FN1547'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>mitre, wherein was engraved Holiness, an ornament of honour, a <a href='#FN1548'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>costly work, the desires of the eyes, goodly and beautiful. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_13">13&#160;</span>Before him there were none such, neither did ever any stranger put them on, <a href='#FN1549'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>but only his children and his children’s children perpetually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN1550' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Their sacrifices shall be wholly consumed every day twice continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN1551' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Moses <a href='#FN1552'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>consecrated him, and anointed him with holy oil: this was appointed unto him by an everlasting covenant, and to his seed, <a href='#FN1553'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>so long as the heavens should remain, that they should minister unto him, and execute the office of the priesthood, and <a href='#FN1554'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>bless the people in his name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1555' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>He chose him out of all men living to offer <a href='#FN1556'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>sacrifices to the Lord, incense, and a <a href='#FN1557'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>sweet savour, for a memorial, to make reconciliation for his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1558' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>He gave unto him his commandments, and authority in the statutes of judgments, that he should teach Jacob the testimonies, and inform Israel in his laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN1559' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Strangers conspired together against him, and <a href='#FN1560'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>maligned him in the wilderness, even the men that were of Dathan’s and Abiron’s side, and the congregation of Core, with fury and wrath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1561' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>This the Lord saw, and it displeased him, and in his wrathful indignation were they consumed: he did wonders upon them, to consume them with the fiery flame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN1562' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>But he made Aaron more honourable, and gave him an heritage, and <a href='#FN1563'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>divided unto him the firstfruits of the increase; especially he prepared bread in abundance: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN1564' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>For they eat of the sacrifices of the Lord, which he gave unto him and his seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN1565' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Howbeit in the land of the people <a href='#FN1566'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>qq</a>he had no inheritance, neither had he any portion among the people: <a href='#FN1567'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>for the Lord himself is his portion and inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1568' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>The third in glory is Phinees the son of Eleazar, because he had zeal in the fear of the Lord, and stood up with good courage of heart:<a href='#FN1569'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a> when the people were turned back, and made reconciliation for Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore was there <a href='#FN1570'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>a covenant of peace made with him, that he should be the chief of the sanctuary and of his people, and that he and his posterity <a href='#FN1571'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>should have the dignity of the priesthood for ever: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN1572' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>According to the covenant made with David son of Jesse, of the tribe of Juda, that the inheritance of the king should be to his posterity alone: so the inheritance of Aaron should also be unto his seed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_26">26&#160;</span>God give you wisdom in your heart <a href='#FN1573'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to judge his people in righteousness, that their good things be not abolished, and that their glory may endure for ever.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR46_0'> 46</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1574' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Jesus the son a Nave was valiant in the wars, and was the successor of Moses in <a href='#FN1575'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>prophecies, who <a href='#FN1576'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>according to his name was made great for the saving of the <a href='#FN1577'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>elect of God, and taking vengeance of the enemies that rose up against them, that he might <a href='#FN1578'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>set Israel in their inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_2">2&#160;</span>How great glory gat he, when he did lift up his hands, and <a href='#FN1579'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>stretched out his sword against the cities! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_3">3&#160;</span>Who before him so stood to it? for the Lord himself <a href='#FN1580'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>brought his enemies unto him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1581' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Did not the sun go back by his means? and was not one day as long as two? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_5">5&#160;</span>He called upon the most high <a href='#FN1582'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Lord, when the enemies pressed upon him on every side; and the great Lord heard him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_6">6&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1583'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>with hailstones of mighty power he made the battle to fall violently upon the nations, and in the descent <span class='add'>of Beth-horon</span> he destroyed them that resisted, that the nations might know all their strength, because he fought in the sight of the Lord, and he followed the <a href='#FN1584'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Mighty One. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_7">7&#160;</span>In the time of Moses also he did a work of mercy, <a href='#FN1585'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>he and Caleb the son of Jephunne, in that they withstood the congregation, and withheld the people from sin, and appeased the wicked murmuring. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_8">8&#160;</span>And of <a href='#FN1586'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>six hundred thousand people on foot, <a href='#FN1587'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>they two were preserved to bring them in to the heritage, even unto <a href='#FN1588'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the land that floweth with milk and honey. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN1589' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>The Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which remained with him unto his old age: so that he entered upon the high places of the land, and his seed obtained it for an heritage: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN1590' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>That all the children of Israel might see that it is good <a href='#FN1591'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>to follow the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_11">11&#160;</span>And concerning the judges, every one by name, <a href='#FN1592'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>whose heart went not a whoring, nor departed from the Lord, <a href='#FN1593'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>let their memory be blessed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN1594' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Let their bones flourish out of <a href='#FN1595'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>their place, and let the name of them that were honoured be continued upon their children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_13">13&#160;</span>Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, <a href='#FN1596'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>beloved of his Lord, established a kingdom, and <a href='#FN1597'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>anointed princes over his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_14">14&#160;</span>By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, and the Lord had respect unto Jacob. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN1598' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>By his faithfulness he was found a true prophet, and by his word he was known to be faithful in vision. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1599' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>He called upon the <a href='#FN1600'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>mighty Lord, <a href='#FN1601'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>when his enemies pressed upon him on every side, when <a href='#FN1602'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>he offered the sucking lamb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1603' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a great noise made his voice to be heard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_18">18&#160;</span>And he destroyed the rulers of the <a href='#FN1604'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Tyrians, and all the princes of the <a href='#FN1605'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_19">19&#160;</span>And before his long <a href='#FN1606'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>sleep <a href='#FN1607'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>he made protestations in the sight of the Lord and his anointed, I have not taken any man’s goods, so much as a shoe: and <a href='#FN1608'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>no man did accuse him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_20">20&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN1609'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>after his death he prophesied, and shewed the king his end, and lifted up his voice from the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of the people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR47_0'> 47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_1">1&#160;</span>And after him rose up <a href='#FN1610'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Nathan to prophesy in the time of David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_2">2&#160;</span>As is <a href='#FN1611'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the fat taken away from the peace offering, <a href='#FN1612'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>so was David chosen out of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1613' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>He played with <a href='#FN1614'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>lions as with kids, and with <a href='#FN1615'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>bears as with lambs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN1616' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Slew he not a giant, when he was yet but young? and did he not take away reproach from the people, when he lifted up his hand with the stone in the sling, and beat down the boasting of Goliath? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_5">5&#160;</span>For he called upon the most high Lord; and he gave him strength in his right hand to slay that mighty warrior, and <a href='#FN1617'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>set up the horn of his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1618' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>So the people honoured him with ten thousands, and praised him in the blessings of the Lord, in that he gave him a crown of glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_7">7&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1619'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>he destroyed the enemies on every side, and <a href='#FN1620'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>brought to nought <a href='#FN1621'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the Philistines his adversaries, and <a href='#FN1622'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>brake their horn in sunder unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_8">8&#160;</span>In all his works he praised the Holy One most high with words of glory; <a href='#FN1623'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>with his whole heart he sung songs, and loved him that made him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN1624' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>He set singers also before the altar, that by their voices they might make sweet melody, and daily sing praises in their songs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_10">10&#160;</span>He beautified their feasts, and set in order the solemn times <a href='#FN1625'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>until the end, that they might praise his holy name, and that the temple might sound from morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1626' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>The Lord took away his sins, and <a href='#FN1627'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>exalted his horn for ever: <a href='#FN1628'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>he gave him a covenant <a href='#FN1629'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of kings, and a throne of glory in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_12">12&#160;</span>After him rose up a wise son, and for his sake <a href='#FN1630'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>he dwelt at large. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN1631' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>Solomon reigned in a peaceable time, and was honoured; for God made all quiet round about him, <a href='#FN1632'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>that he might build an house in his name, and prepare his sanctuary for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN1633' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>How wise wast thou in thy youth and, <a href='#FN1634'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>as a flood, filled with understanding! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_15">15&#160;</span>Thy soul covered the whole earth, and thou filledst it with <a href='#FN1635'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>dark parables. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1636' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Thy name went <a href='#FN1637'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>far unto the islands; and for thy peace thou wast beloved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1638' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>The countries marvelled at thee for thy songs, and <a href='#FN1639'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>proverbs, and <a href='#FN1640'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>parables, and interpretations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_18">18&#160;</span>By the name of the Lord God, which is called the Lord God of Israel, <a href='#FN1641'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>thou didst gather gold as <a href='#FN1642'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>tin and didst multiply silver as <a href='#FN1643'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>lead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN1644' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Thou didst bow thy loins unto women, and <a href='#FN1645'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>by thy body thou wast brought into subjection. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN1646' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Thou didst stain thy honour, and pollute thy seed: so that thou broughtest wrath upon thy children, and wast grieved for thy folly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_21">21&#160;</span>So <a href='#FN1647'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the kingdom was divided, and out of Ephraim ruled a rebellious kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN1648' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>But the Lord will never leave off his mercy, neither shall any of his works perish, neither will he abolish the posterity of <a href='#FN1649'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>his elect, and the seed of him that loveth him he will not take away: wherefore he gave a remnant unto Jacob, and <a href='#FN1650'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>out of him a root unto David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1651' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Thus rested Solomon with his fathers, and of his seed he left behind him Roboam, even the foolishness of the people, and one that had no understanding, who <a href='#FN1652'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>turned away the people through his counsel. There was also <a href='#FN1653'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>Jeroboam the son of Nebat, <a href='#FN1654'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>who caused Israel to sin, and shewed Ephraim the way of sin: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_24">24&#160;</span>And their sins were multiplied exceedingly, <a href='#FN1655'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>that they were driven out of the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_25">25&#160;</span>For they sought out all wickedness, till the vengeance came upon them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR48_0'> 48</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_1">1&#160;</span>Then stood up <a href='#FN1656'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Elias the prophet as fire, and his word <a href='#FN1657'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>burned like a lamp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1658' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>He <a href='#FN1659'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>brought a sore famine upon them, and by his zeal he diminished their number. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1660' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>By the word of the Lord he <a href='#FN1661'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>shut up the heaven, and also <a href='#FN1662'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>three times brought down fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_4">4&#160;</span>O Elias, <a href='#FN1663'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>dd</a>how wast thou honoured in thy wondrous deeds! and who may glory like unto thee! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN1664' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Who didst raise up a dead man from death, and his soul from the <a href='#FN1665'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>place of the dead, by the word of the most High: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1666' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>Who broughtest kings to destruction, and <a href='#FN1667'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>honorable men from their <a href='#FN1668'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1669'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>bed: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN1670' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Who heardest the rebuke of the Lord in Sinai, and in <a href='#FN1671'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Horeb the judgment of vengeance: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN1672' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Who annointedst kings to take revenge, and <a href='#FN1673'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>prophets to succeed after <a href='#FN1674'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>him: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN1675' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Who was taken up in a whirlwind of fire, and in a chariot of fiery horses: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_10">10&#160;</span>Who wast <a href='#FN1676'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ordained for reproofs in their times, to pacify the wrath of the Lord’s judgment, before it brake forth into fury, and <a href='#FN1677'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>to turn the heart of the father unto the son, and <a href='#FN1678'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>to <a href='#FN1679'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>restore the tribes of Jacob. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_11">11&#160;</span>Blessed are they that saw thee, and <a href='#FN1680'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>slept in love; for we shall surely live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN1681' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Elias it was, who was covered with a whirlwind: and <a href='#FN1682'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Eliseus was filled with his spirit: whilst he lived, <a href='#FN1683'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>he was not moved with the presence of any prince, neither could any bring him into subjection. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN1684' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1685' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>No word could overcome him; and <a href='#FN1686'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>after his <a href='#FN1687'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>death his body prophesied. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_14">14&#160;</span>He did wonders in his life, and at his death were his works marvellous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_15">15&#160;</span>For all this the people repented not, neither departed they from their sins, <a href='#FN1688'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>till they were spoiled and carried out of their land, and were scattered through all the earth: <a href='#FN1689'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>yet there remained a small people, and a ruler in the house of David: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_16">16&#160;</span>Of whom some did that which was pleasing to God, and some multiplied sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN1690' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>Ezekias <a href='#FN1691'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>fortified his city, and <a href='#FN1692'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>brought in water into the midst thereof: he digged the hard rock with iron, and made <a href='#FN1693'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>wells for waters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_18">18&#160;</span>In his time <a href='#FN1694'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Sennacherib came up, and sent Rabsaces, and lifted up his hand against Sion, and boasted proudly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_19">19&#160;</span>Then trembled their hearts and hands, and they <a href='#FN1695'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>were in pain, as women in travail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN1696' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>But they called upon the Lord which is merciful, and <a href='#FN1697'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>stretched out their hands toward him: and immediately the Holy One heard them out of heaven, and delivered them by the <a href='#FN1698'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>ministry of Esay. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_21">21&#160;</span><a href='#FN1699' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>He smote the host of the Assyrians, and <a href='#FN1700'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>his angel destroyed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN1701' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>For Ezekias had done the thing that pleased the Lord, and was strong in the ways of David his father, <a href='#FN1702'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>as Esay the prophet, who was great and <a href='#FN1703'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>faithful in his vision, had commanded him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN1704' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>In his time the sun went backward, and he lengthened the king’s life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_24">24&#160;</span>He saw by an excellent spirit what should come to pass at the last, and <a href='#FN1705'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>he comforted them that mourned in Sion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_25">25&#160;</span>He shewed what should come to pass for ever, and secret things or ever they came.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR49_0'> 49</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_1">1&#160;</span>The remembrance of <a href='#FN1706'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Josias is like <a href='#FN1707'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the apothecary: it is sweet as honey in all mouths, and as <a href='#FN1708'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>musick at a banquet of wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_2">2&#160;</span>He <a href='#FN1709'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>behaved himself uprightly in the conversion of the people, and <a href='#FN1710'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>took away the abominations of iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN1711' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>He directed his heart unto the Lord, and in the time of the ungodly he established the worship of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_4">4&#160;</span>All, except David and Ezekias and Josias, were defective: for they forsook the law of the most High, even the kings of Juda failed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_5">5&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN1712'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>he gave their <a href='#FN1713'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>power unto others, and their glory to a strange nation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN1714' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>They burnt the chosen city of the sanctuary, and made the streets desolate, <a href='#FN1715'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN1716'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>according to the prophecy of Jeremias. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_7">7&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN1717'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they entreated him evil, who nevertheless was a prophet, <a href='#FN1718'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>sanctified in his mother’s womb, <a href='#FN1719'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>that he might root out, and afflict, and destroy; and <a href='#FN1720'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>that he might build up also, and plant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_8">8&#160;</span>It was <a href='#FN1721'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Ezekiel who saw the glorious vision, which was shewed him upon <a href='#FN1722'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the chariot of the cherubims. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_9">9&#160;</span>For he made mention of the <a href='#FN1723'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>enemies under the figure of the rain, and <a href='#FN1724'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>directed them that went right. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_10">10&#160;</span>And of <a href='#FN1725'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the twelve prophets <a href='#FN1726'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>let the memorial be blessed, and <a href='#FN1727'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>let their bones flourish again out of their place: for they comforted Jacob, and delivered them by assured hope. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_11">11&#160;</span>How shall we magnify <a href='#FN1728'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>Zorobabel? even he was <a href='#FN1729'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>as a signet on the right hand: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_12">12&#160;</span>So was <a href='#FN1730'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>Jesus the son of Josedec: who in their time builded the house, and set up an holy temple to the Lord, which was prepared for everlasting glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_13">13&#160;</span>And among the <a href='#FN1731'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>elect was Neemias, whose renown is great, <a href='#FN1732'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>who raised up for us the walls that were fallen, and set up the gates and the bars, and raised up our ruins again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_14">14&#160;</span>But upon the earth was no man created like <a href='#FN1733'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>Enoch; for he was taken from the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_15">15&#160;</span>Neither was there a young man born like <a href='#FN1734'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Joseph, <a href='#FN1735'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>a governor of his brethren, <a href='#FN1736'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>a stay of the people, <a href='#FN1737'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>whose bones were regarded of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN1738' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Sem and <a href='#FN1739'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Seth were in great honour among men, and so was <a href='#FN1740'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Adam above every living thing in creation.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR50_0'> 50</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_1">1&#160;</span>Simon <a href='#FN1741'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the high priest, the son of Onias, who in his life repaired the house again, and in his days fortified the temple: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_2">2&#160;</span>And by him was built from the foundation the double height, the high fortress of the wall about the temple: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_3">3&#160;</span>In his days the <a href='#FN1742'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>cistern to receive water, being in compass as the sea, was covered with plates of brass: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_4">4&#160;</span>He took care of the temple that it should not fall, and fortified the city against besieging: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN1743' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>How was he honoured in the midst of the people in his coming out of <a href='#FN1744'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the sanctuary! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_6">6&#160;</span>He was as <a href='#FN1745'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the morning star in the midst of a cloud, and as the moon at the full: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN1746' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>As the sun shining upon the temple of the most High, and as the <a href='#FN1747'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>rainbow giving light in the bright clouds: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_8">8&#160;</span>And as the flower of <a href='#FN1748'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>roses in the spring of the year, as <a href='#FN1749'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>lilies by the rivers of waters, and as the branches of the <a href='#FN1750'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>frankincense tree in the time of summer: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_9">9&#160;</span>As <a href='#FN1751'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>fire and <a href='#FN1752'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>incense in the censer, and as a vessel of beaten gold set with all manner of precious stones: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_10">10&#160;</span>And as a fair <a href='#FN1753'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>olive tree budding forth fruit, and as a <a href='#FN1754'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>cypress tree which groweth up to the clouds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN1755' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>When he put on the robe of honour, and was clothed with the perfection of glory, <a href='#FN1756'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>when he went up to the holy altar, <a href='#FN1757'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>he made the garment of holiness honourable. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_12">12&#160;</span>When he took the portions out of the priests’ hands, he himself stood by the hearth of the altar, compassed about, as a young <a href='#FN1758'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>cedar in Libanus; and as <a href='#FN1759'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>palm trees compassed they him round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_13">13&#160;</span>So were all the sons of Aaron in their glory, and the oblations of the Lord in their hands, before all the congregation of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_14">14&#160;</span>And finishing the service at the altar, that he might adorn the offering of the most high <a href='#FN1760'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Almighty, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_15">15&#160;</span>He stretched out his hand to the cup, and poured of <a href='#FN1761'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the blood of the grape, <a href='#FN1762'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>he poured out at the foot of the altar <a href='#FN1763'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a><a href='#FN1764'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>a sweetsmelling savour unto the most high King of all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_16">16&#160;</span>Then shouted the sons of Aaron, and <a href='#FN1765'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>sounded the <a href='#FN1766'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>silver trumpets, and <a href='#FN1767'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>made a great noise to be heard, <a href='#FN1768'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>for a remembrance before the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_17">17&#160;</span>Then all the people together hasted, and fell down to the earth upon their faces to worship their Lord God <a href='#FN1769'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Almighty, the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_18">18&#160;</span>The singers also sang praises with their voices, with great variety of sounds was there made sweet melody. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_19">19&#160;</span>And the people besought the Lord, the most High, by prayer before him that is merciful, till the solemnity of the Lord was ended, and they had finished his service. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_20">20&#160;</span>Then he went down, and lifted up his hands over the whole congregation of the children of Israel, <a href='#FN1770'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>to give the blessing of the Lord with his lips, and to rejoice in his name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_21">21&#160;</span>And they bowed themselves down to worship the second time, that they might receive a blessing from the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_22">22&#160;</span>Now therefore <a href='#FN1771'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>bless ye the God of all, which only doeth wondrous things every where, <a href='#FN1772'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>which exalteth our days from the womb, and dealeth with us according to his mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_23">23&#160;</span>He grant us joyfulness of heart, and that peace may be in our days in Israel for ever: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_24">24&#160;</span>That he would confirm his mercy with us, and deliver us at his time! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_25">25&#160;</span>There be <a href='#FN1773'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>two manner of nations which my heart abhorreth, and the third is no nation: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN1774' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>They that sit upon the mountain of Samaria, and <a href='#FN1775'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>they that dwell among the Philistines, and <a href='#FN1776'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>that foolish people that dwell in <a href='#FN1777'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>Sichem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_27">27&#160;</span>Jesus the son of Sirach of Jerusalem hath written in this book the instruction of understanding and knowledge, who out of his heart <a href='#FN1778'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>poured forth wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN1779' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>Blessed is he that shall be exercised in these things; and he that layeth them up in his heart shall become wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_29">29&#160;</span>For if he do them, he shall be strong to all things: <a href='#FN1780'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>for the light of the Lord leadeth him, who giveth wisdom to the godly. <a href='#FN1781'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever. Amen, Amen.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR51_0'> 51</div>
<div class='p'>A Prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_1">1&#160;</span>I will thank thee, O Lord and King, and praise thee, O <a href='#FN1782'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>God my Saviour: I do give praise unto thy name: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_2">2&#160;</span>For thou art my defender and helper, and has preserved my body from destruction, and <a href='#FN1783'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>from the snare of the slanderous tongue, and from the lips that <a href='#FN1784'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>forge lies, and has been mine helper against mine adversaries: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_3">3&#160;</span>And hast delivered me, according to the multitude of thy mercies and greatness of thy name, from <a href='#FN1785'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the teeth of them that were ready to devour me, and out of the hands of such as sought after my life, and from the manifold afflictions which I had; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_4">4&#160;</span>From the choking of fire on every side, and from the midst of the fire which I kindled not; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_5">5&#160;</span>From the depth of the belly of hell, from an unclean tongue, and from lying words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_6">6&#160;</span>By an accusation to the king from an unrighteous tongue my soul drew near even unto death, my life was near to the hell beneath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN1786' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>They compassed me on every side, and there was no man to help me: I looked for the succour of men, but there was none. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_8">8&#160;</span>Then thought I upon thy mercy, O Lord, and upon thy acts of old, how thou deliverest <a href='#FN1787'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>such as wait for thee, and savest them out of the hands of the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_9">9&#160;</span>Then lifted I up my supplications from the earth, and prayed for deliverance from death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_10">10&#160;</span>I called upon the Lord, <a href='#FN1788'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the Father of my Lord, that he would not leave me in the days of my trouble, and <a href='#FN1789'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>in the time of the proud, when there was no help. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_11">11&#160;</span>I will praise thy name continually, and will sing praises with thanksgiving; <a href='#FN1790'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and so my prayer was heard: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_12">12&#160;</span>For thou savedst me from destruction, and deliveredst me from the evil time: therefore will I give thanks, and praise thee, and bless they name, O Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_13">13&#160;</span>When I was yet young, or ever I <a href='#FN1791'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>went abroad, I desired wisdom openly in my prayer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_14">14&#160;</span>I prayed for her before the temple, and will seek her out even to the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_15">15&#160;</span>Even from the flower till the grape was ripe hath my heart delighted in her: my foot went the right way, from my youth up sought I after her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_16">16&#160;</span>I bowed down mine ear a little, and received her, and gat much learning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_17">17&#160;</span>I <a href='#FN1792'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>gg</a>profited therein, therefore will I ascribe glory unto him that giveth me wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_18">18&#160;</span>For I purposed to do after her, and earnestly I followed that which is good; so shall I not be confounded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_19">19&#160;</span>My soul hath wrestled with her, and in my doings I was exact: I stretched forth my hands to the heaven above, and bewailed my ignorances of her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_20">20&#160;</span>I directed my soul unto her, and I found her in pureness: <a href='#FN1793'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I have had my heart joined with her from the beginning, therefore shall I not be foresaken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_21">21&#160;</span>My <a href='#FN1794'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>heart was troubled in seeking her: therefore have I gotten a good possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_22">22&#160;</span>The Lord hath given me a tongue for my reward, and I will praise him therewith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_23">23&#160;</span>Draw near unto me, ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of learning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_24">24&#160;</span>Wherefore are ye slow, and what say ye to these things, seeing your souls are very thirsty? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_25">25&#160;</span>I opened my mouth, and said, Buy her for yourselves <a href='#FN1795'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>without money. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_26">26&#160;</span><a href='#FN1796' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Put your neck <a href='#FN1797'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>under the yoke, and let your soul receive instruction: <a href='#FN1798'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>she is hard at hand to find. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_27">27&#160;</span>Behold with your eyes, <a href='#FN1799'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>how that I have but little labour, and have gotten unto me much rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_28">28&#160;</span><a href='#FN1800' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Get learning <a href='#FN1801'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>with a great sum of money, and get <a href='#FN1802'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>much gold by her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_29">29&#160;</span><a href='#FN1803' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>Let your soul rejoice in his mercy, and be not ashamed of his praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_30">30&#160;</span><a href='#FN1804' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Work your work betimes, and in his time <a href='#FN1805'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>he will give you your reward. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote1"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Some refer this Prologue to Athanasius, because it is found in his <span class='add'>Synopsis</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote2"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>collected</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote3"><span class="notemark">a</span></a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote4"><span class="notemark">b</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_1'>ch. 44. 1</a>–<a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_24'>50. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote5"><span class="notemark">c</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_5'>Heb. 11. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote6"><span class="notemark">d</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_1'>ch. 51. 1</a>–</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote7"><span class="notemark">e</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_13'>ch. 51. 13–30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote8"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_27'>ch. 50. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote9"><span class="notemark">a</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK24_44'>Luke 24. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote10"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of another nation</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote11"><span class="notemark">a</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK24_44'>Luke 24. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote12"><span class="notemark">b</span></a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_40'>Acts 21. 40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote13"><span class="notemark">a</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK24_44'>Luke 24. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote14"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>prophecics</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_15'>ch. 36. 15</a> marg. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T11_18'>1 Tim. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote15"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>excellency</span>. So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M215_13'>2 Macc. 15. 13</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_26'>Matt. 6. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_31'>10. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_12'>12. 12</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote16"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">About B.C. 133.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote17"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>help of learning</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#sirachprologuenote18"><span class="notemark">c</span></a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_17'>Acts 13. 17</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Before CHRIST about 200.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_9'>1 Kin. 3. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_29'>4. 29</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_5'>Jam. 1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_1'>John 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_10'>ch. 18. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_1'>John 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_12'>Baruch 3. 12</a>. So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_47'>2 Esdr. 14. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_13'>Wisd. 9. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_20'>ver. 20</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_15'>Wisd. 3. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_3'>Wisd. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_20'>Wisd. 11. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_31'>ch. 6. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_6'>15. 6</a> in the Gk. So <a href='1TH.xhtml#H12_19'>1 Thess. 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_3'>ch. 2. 3</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_26'>3. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_28'>6. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_12'>12. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_7'>14. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_1'>30. 1</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_10'>10</a> (Gk.). &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_22'>31. 22</a>. So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_37'>Ps. 37. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shall be blessed</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>Prov. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_15"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_23'>Prov. 8. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_20'>2 Chr. 20. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_16"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>Prov. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_17"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_3'>Ps. 112. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_27'>ch. 50. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_20"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_13'>Wisd. 9. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_20'>ver. 20</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_15'>Wisd. 3. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_3'>Wisd. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_2'>Prov. 3. 2</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>escape punishment</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_11'>ch. 23. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_7'>Ps. 37. 7–9</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_7'>ch. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_24"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_9'>ch. 39. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_25"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_26"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_17'>Matt. 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_26"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_5'>James 1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Be not disobedient to</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_15'>ch. 2. 15</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_8'>Rom. 2. 8</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_28"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_6'>James 1. 6</a>, <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_29"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_29'>ch. 4. 29</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_13'>5. 13</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_19'>James 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_30"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_12'>Matt. 23. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_30"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_14'>Prov. 5. 14</a>. So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_26'>Prov. 26. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_30"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_10'>Acts 13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_1'>Matt. 4. 1</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_12'>2 Tim. 3. 12</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_12'>1 Pet. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_15'>ch. 12. 15</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_27'>Heb. 11. 27</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>haste not</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_28'>ch. 3. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_8'>5. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_13'>10. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_11'>23. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_14'>25. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_19'>38. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_9'>40. 9</a> in the Gk. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_4'>ver. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_3'>46. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_2'>48. 2</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_5'>2 Pet. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_24'>ch. 24. 24</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_20'>Deut. 10. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_28'>ch. 3. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_8'>5. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_13'>10. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_11'>23. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_14'>25. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_19'>38. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_9'>40. 9</a> in the Gk. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_4'>ver. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_3'>46. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_2'>48. 2</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_5'>2 Pet. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_3'>Prov. 17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_17'>ch. 3. 17</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_3'>Ps. 37. 3</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_7"><span class="notemark">j</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_7'>Ps. 37. 7</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_23'>ch. 1. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_32'>Deut. 5. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_25'>Ps. 37. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS30_2'>Ps. 30. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_18'>145. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAN.xhtml#PN1_1'>Prayer of Manasses</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS86_15'>Ps. 86. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS130_4'>Ps. 130. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_18'>ch. 22. 18</a>. So <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_8'>Rev. 21. 8</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_14'>Wisd. 9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_23'>ch. 25. 23</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_12'>Heb. 12. 12</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_12"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_21'>1 Kin. 18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_2'>ch. 41. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_36'>Heb. 10. 36</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_3'>James 1. 3</a>, <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_34'>Ex. 32. 34</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_18'>ch. 16. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN14_23'>John 14. 23</a>. So <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_5'>1 John 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS10_17'>Ps. 10. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_18"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_4'>Ex. 18. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_18"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S224_14'>2 Sam. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR2_18"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_5'>ch. 18. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_8'>ver. 8</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_27'>ch. 7. 27</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exod. 20. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>judgment</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_19'>1 Tim. 6. 19</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_6"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_8'>ver. 8</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_27'>ch. 7. 27</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exod. 20. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_28'>Matt. 11. 28</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C116_18'>1 Cor. 16. 18</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C27_13'>2 Cor. 7. 13</a>. <a href='PHM.xhtml#PM1_7'>Philem. 7</a>, <a href='PHM.xhtml#PM1_20'>20</a>. So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_32'>Rom. 15. 32</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_8"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_8'>ver. 8</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_27'>ch. 7. 27</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exod. 20. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_27'>Gen. 27. 27–29</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_2'>49. 2</a>, &amp;c. Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_1'>Deut. 33. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_11"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_6'>Prov. 17. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in all thine</span> <span class="notemark">f</span> <span class='add'>ability</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_14"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_9'>Deut. 25. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_15"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_2'>Matt. 16. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_17"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_5'>ch. 2. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_18"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_3'>Phil. 2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_18"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_4'>Prov. 3. 4</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_24'>ch. 41. 24</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_9'>Ps. 25. 9</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_14'>14</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_18'>ch. 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_21"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_27'>Prov. 25. 27</a>? <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_3'>Rom. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2TH.xhtml#H23_11'>2 Thess. 3. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_26"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_27"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>The proud man is not healed by his punishment</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_28"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_30"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_1'>Ps. 41. 1</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_2'>2</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_7'>Matt. 5. 7</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_27'>Dan. 4. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_31"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_9'>Luke 16. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_13'>Lev. 19. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_13'>Lev. 19. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_3"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_11'>ch. 7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_27'>Prov. 3. 27</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_1'>ver. 1</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_42'>Matt. 5. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_42'>Matt. 5. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>him that asketh</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_27'>Prov. 28. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_9'>Deut. 15. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_31'>Prov. 14. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_3'>Jer. 22. 3</a>. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_17'>Isai. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_21'>Ex. 18. 21</a> (Heb. &amp; Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_16'>Job 29. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_17'>31. 17</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_18'>18</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_27'>James 1. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_35'>Luke 6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_8'>Prov. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_19'>Matt. 11. 19</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK7_35'>Luke 7. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_18'>Prov. 3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_17'>Prov. 8. 17</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_36'>ch. 6. 36</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_14'>32. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_5'>39. 5</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a> (Gk.), <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_12'>12</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_18'>ver. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_35'>Prov. 3. 35</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_26'>ch. 37. 26</a> (text).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in <span class='add'>the sanctuary</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_8'>Wisd. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_13'>Matt. 7. 13</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a> (Gk.), <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_12'>12</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_18'>ver. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_18"><span class="notemark">u</span> 4.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_19'>ch. 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_20"><span class="notemark">w</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_16'>Eph. 5. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_20"><span class="notemark">x</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_16'>ch. 41. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_21"><span class="notemark">y</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_22'>ch. 20. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>42. 1–8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_21"><span class="notemark">z</span> 4.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_17'>ch. 41. 17–24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_22"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>ch. 42. 1</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_17'>Deut. 10. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in time of saving</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_26"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_16'>James 5. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>And strive not against the stream</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_27"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>ch. 42. 1</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_17'>Deut. 10. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_29"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_29'>ch. 1. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_30"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_9'>Eph. 6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_31"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC20_35'>Acts 20. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_31"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>give</span>. Gk. as <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_8'>Matt. 20. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_8'>ver. 8</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_2'>34. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_15'>15</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_12'>35. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_11'>37. 11</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_5'>Acts 3. 5</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T14_16'>1 Tim. 4. 16</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_17'>1 Tim. 6. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_15'>Luke 12. 15</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_5'>Prov. 3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC8_11'>Eccles. 8. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_9'>2 Pet. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_7'>Exod. 34. 7</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_13'>ch. 16. 13</a>. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_3'>1 Thess. 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_27'>ch. 3. 27</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_1'>ch. 21. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_11'>ch. 16. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_7"><span class="notemark">j</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_6'>Isai. 55. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1TH.xhtml#H15_3'>1 Thess. 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_8"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_8'>ver. 8</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_11'>ch. 13. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_2'>34. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_15'>15</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_12'>35. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_11'>37. 11</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_5'>Acts 3. 5</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T14_16'>1 Tim. 4. 16</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_2'>Prov. 10. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK7_19'>Ezek. 7. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_9"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_8'>James 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_14'>ver. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_1'>ch. 6. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_13'>28. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_8'>James 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_10"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_14'>ver. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_1'>ch. 6. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_13'>28. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_11"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_19'>Jam. 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_11"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_9'>ch. 8. 9</a>. See <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_15'>1 Pet. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_12"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_9'>ch. 8. 9</a>. See <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_15'>1 Pet. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_12"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_12'>Wisd. 8. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_13"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_21'>Prov. 18. 21</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_37'>Matt. 12. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_13"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_29'>ch. 1. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_14"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_28'>ch. 21. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_13'>28. 13</a>. See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C212_20'>2 Cor. 12. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_14"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_20'>Prov. 26. 20</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_14"><span class="notemark">z</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_30'>Prov. 6. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR5_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_14'>ver. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_1'>ch. 6. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_13'>28. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_16'>Rom. 12. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_3'>Isai. 56. 3</a>. So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_31'>Luke 23. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>A sweet throat</span>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_103'>Ps. 119. 103</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_13'>ch. 20. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>get him in</span> the time of <span class='add'>trouble</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_10'>ver. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_4'>ch. 37. 4</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_10"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_10'>ver. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_13"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_15'>Matt. 7. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_17'>10. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_6'>16. 6</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_11'>11</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_8'>ver. 8–12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EST.xhtml#ET7_4'>Esther 7. 4</a> (Engl.). <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_26'>Matt. 16. 26</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_37'>Mark 8. 37</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_18"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_20'>Matt. 19. 20</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_66'>1 Macc. 2. 66</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_7'>James 5. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_6'>2 Tim. 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_27'>ch. 50. 27</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_30'>Matt. 11. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_16'>Prov. 17. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_2'>18. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>heart</span>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_32'>Prov. 6. 32</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_12'>11. 12</a> in the Heb.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC12_3'>Zech. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_8'>ch. 43. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>collar</span>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_9'>Prov. 1. 9</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_25"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_26'>ch. 51. 26</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_29'>Matt. 11. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_26"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_5'>Deut. 6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_26"><span class="notemark">r</span> 6.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_5'>Deut. 6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_27"><span class="notemark">s</span> 6.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_21'>Wisd. 8. 21</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_28"><span class="notemark">t</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_28"><span class="notemark">u</span> 6.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_13'>ch. 22. 13</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_16'>Jer. 6. 16</a> (Heb.). <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_29'>Matt. 11. 29</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_29"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_29"><span class="notemark">w</span> 6.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a ribband of blue</span> silk. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_38'>Numb. 15. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_31"><span class="notemark">x</span> 6.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_32"><span class="notemark">y</span> 6.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_1'>Prov. 13. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_8'>14. 8</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_15'>15</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_18'>18</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_3'>22. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_2'>28. 2</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_12'>ch. 21. 12</a>. marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_34"><span class="notemark">z</span> 6.34</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_9'>ch. 8. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_35"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.35</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_36"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.36</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_12'>ch. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_37"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_2'>Ps. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_37"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.37</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TH.xhtml#H13_13'>1 Thess. 3. 13</a>. So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS31_24'>Ps. 31. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_13'>1 Pet. 3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_8'>Prov. 22. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_12'>ch. 20. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_11'>35. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_8'>40. 8</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_12'>Ps. 79. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_2'>Job 9. 2</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_20'>20</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS143_2'>Ps. 143. 2</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_16'>Eccles. 7. 16</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_11'>Luke 18. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_15'>Lev. 19. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_13'>Rom. 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_11'>1 Kings 12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_18'>Isai. 5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_27'>Prov. 21. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_1'>Luke 18. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_3'>ch. 4. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_5'>Prov. 17. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_14'>ch. 11. 14</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_7'>1 Sam. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>Plow not</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_9'>ch. 32. 9</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_2'>Eccles. 5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>vain repetition</span>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_7'>Matt. 6. 7</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>created</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_25'>ch. 39. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_17"><span class="notemark">qq</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_21'>ch. 18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_24'>Isai. 66. 24</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_24'>ch. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_18"><span class="notemark">rr</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_1'>ch. 27. 1</a>. marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP4_3'>Phil. 4. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K19_28'>1 Kings 9. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_19"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_1'>ch. 26. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_19"><span class="notemark">v</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR31_10'>Prov. 31. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_20"><span class="notemark">w</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_30'>ch. 33. 30</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_20"><span class="notemark">x</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_13'>Lev. 19. 13</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_14'>Deut. 24. 14</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_15'>15</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_22'>ch. 34. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_21"><span class="notemark">w</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_30'>ch. 33. 30</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_21"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_21"><span class="notemark">z</span> 7.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_2'>Ex. 21. 2</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_9'>Deut. 15. 9</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_22"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT25_4'>Deut. 25. 4</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_23'>Prov. 27. 23–27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_23"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_4'>Eph. 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_12'>ch. 30. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM3_27'>Lam. 3. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_9'>ch. 42. 9–11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>hateful</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_27"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_27"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_3'>Tobit 4. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_16'>Jude 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_30"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_5'>Deut. 6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_19'>Deut. 12. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_31"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT12_19'>Deut. 12. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_31"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_9'>Prov. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_31"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV7_1'>Lev. 7. 1–7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_31"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_27'>Ex 29. 27</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_28'>28</a>. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV7_34'>Lev. 7. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_31"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_1'>Lev. 2. 1–10</a> &amp; <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV6_14'>6. 14–16</a>. &amp; <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV7_9'>7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_31"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU5_9'>Numb. 5. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_8'>18. 8–19</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_28'>28</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R231_6'>2 Chr 31. 6</a>. <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH10_35'>Neh. 10. 35</a>, <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH10_36'>36</a>, <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH10_38'>38</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_8'>ch. 35. 8</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_32"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_8'>Deut. 1##. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>thy liberality</span>. See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_5'>2 Cor. 9. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_32"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.32</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_10'>Deut. 15. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_33"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_17'>Tobit 4. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_34"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_12'>ch. 37. 12</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_15'>Rom. 12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_35"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.35</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_36'>Matt. 25. 36</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_39'>39</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_43'>43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_36"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.36</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_6'>ch. 28. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_20'>38. 20</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_29'>Deut. 32. 29</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_24'>ch. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_8'>ch. 28. 8</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_25'>Matt. 5. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_6'>ch. 31. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of an evil tongue</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_18'>ch. 9. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_20'>Prov. 26. 20</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_21'>21</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_10'>ch. 28. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM3_6'>James 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C22_6'>2 Cor. 2. 6</a>, <a href='2CO.xhtml#C22_7'>7</a>. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL6_1'>Gal. 6. 1</a>, <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL6_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_5'>ch. 9. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_32'>Lev. 19. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_34'>ch. 6. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_11'>ch. 5. 11</a>. See <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_15'>1 Pet. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_11'>ch. 28. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_21'>Wisd. 14. 21</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>for thy mouth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_4'>ch. 29. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_1'>Prov. 6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>opinion</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_8'>Gen. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_24'>Prov. 22. 24</a> ?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_14'>ch 9. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR8_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_13'>Prov. 11. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_19'>20. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_6'>Deut. 13. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_13'>ch. 3. 13</a> marg. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_12'>11. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_13'>14. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_6'>44. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_8'>ch. 45. 8</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_5'>Prov. 7. 5</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_10'>10</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>playeth upon instruments</span>. Gk. as <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_23'>1 Sam. 16. 23</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_1'>See Job 31. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_25'>Prov. 6. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_28'>Matt. 5. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_13'>ch. 51. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_12'>Job 31. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_22'>ch. 26. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_21'>41. 21</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM7_2'>Rom. 7. 2</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_39'>Luke 5. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_1'>Ps. 37. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_12'>ch. 18. 12</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_38'>Ps. 37. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_32'>Rom. 1. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_17'>ch. 8. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_2'>Ps. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_3'>ch. 8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_12'>Prov. 29. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS75_7'>Ps. 75. 7</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E18_6'>1 Esdr. 8. 6</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>face</span>. Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_33'>Ex. 34. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_24'>ch. 38. 24</a> (Gk.). <a href='1CO.xhtml#C11_20'>1 Cor. 1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_17'>Lev. 19. 17</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_21'>Matt. 18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_8"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS75_7'>Ps. 75. 7</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_32'>ch. 17. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN3_17'>1 John 3. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_62'>1 Macc. 2. 62</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_63'>63</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_11'>2 Macc. 9. 11</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_62'>1 Macc. 2. 62</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_63'>63</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_11'>2 Macc. 9. 11</a>, <a href='2MA.xhtml#M29_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS14_11'>Isai. 14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_27'>ch. 50. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_14"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_8'>1 Sam. 2. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_6'>Ps. 9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_16'>ch. 11. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_1'>Job 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>unstable generation</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>principality</span>. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP1_21'>Ephes. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR9_23'>Jer. 9. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_23"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_7'>Acts 13. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_22'>Acts 22. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_25"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_2'>Prov. 17. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_25"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_5'>Prov. 15. 5</a>. Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_13'>2 Sam. 12. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_27"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_9'>Prov. 12. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_28"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_26'>Matt. 16. 26</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_37'>Mark 8. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_30"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_9'>Prov. 12. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of the lowly</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_20'>ch. 3. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_15'>10. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_5'>12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_40'>Gen. 41. 40</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_3'>Dan. 6. 3</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_4'>ch. 39. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_21'>ch. 29. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_26'>39. 26</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC12_21'>Acts 12. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_14'>Ps. 139. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>tyrants</span>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_16'>Wisd. 14. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_8'>Job 2. 8</a>. Comp. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_3'>Ezra 9. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_28'>1 Sam. 15. 28</a>. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET7_10'>Esth. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_14'>Deut. 13. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_6'>17. 6</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_13'>Prov. 18. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in the judgment of sinners</span>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_1'>Ps. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_12'>Phil. 3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_12'>Phil. 3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>escape</span> hurt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_3'>Prov. 10. 3</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_22'>Matt. 19. 22</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_9'>1 Tim. 6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB42_10'>Job 42. 10</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_22'>Prov. 10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_7'>1 Sam. 2. 7</a>. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_21'>Job 1. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_10'>2. 10</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_11'>ch. 7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK28_4'>Ezek. 28. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_18'>ch. 10. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_3'>ch. 31. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_3'>ch. 31. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>pass</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_19"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_10'>Ps. 49. 10</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_4'>ch. 14. 4</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_15'>15</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS39_6'>Ps. 39. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_20"><span class="notemark">s</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_3'>2 Kin. 23. 3</a> (Gk.). So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_22'>Matt. 10. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_8'>Eccles. 5. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>for a reward</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_23"><span class="notemark">u</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_14'>Mal. 3. 14</a>. Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_9'>Job 2. 9</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB2_14'>Tobit 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_24"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_3'>ch. 31. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_25"><span class="notemark">v</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_25'>ch. 18. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_26"><span class="notemark">w</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_24'>ch. 18. 24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_28"><span class="notemark">x</span> 11.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_24'>ch. 37. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_32"><span class="notemark">y</span> 11.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_18'>John 18. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN21_9'>21. 9</a> in the Greek.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_34"><span class="notemark">z</span> 11.34</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_32'>John 16. 32</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_6'>Matt. 7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_35'>Luke 6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_7'>ver. 7</a>. So <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL6_10'>Gal. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_7'>ver. 7</a>. So <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL6_10'>Gal. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_44'>Matt. 5. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_44'>Matt. 5. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_34'>ch. 11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_6'>Jude 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_7'>ver. 7</a>. So <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL6_10'>Gal. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_7'>ver. 7</a>. So <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL6_10'>Gal. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_44'>Matt. 5. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>brass</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS10_10'>Ps. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_26'>ch. 19. 26</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_27'>27</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_24'>Baruch 6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_26'>Wisd. 7. 26</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C113_12'>1 Cor. 13. 12</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_24'>Baruch 6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_3'>James 5. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_12"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_1'>ch. 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS58_5'>Ps. 58. 5</a>. See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_11'>Eccles. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>mingled</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 12.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_24'>Prov. 26. 24</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_25'>25</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS28_3'>Ps. 28. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_6'>Jer. 41. 6</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_6'>Jer. 41. 6</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>supplant</span>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_9'>Ps. 41. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_7'>ch. 13. 7</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB16_4'>Job 16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_23'>Job 27. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_25'>ch. 13. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_2'>Deut. 7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>This shall smite against</span> it, <span class='add'>and be broken</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_23'>Prov. 18. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_18'>ch. 12. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>by thy simplicity</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_20'>1 Esdr. 3. 20</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_17'>Prov. 25. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Forbear not</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>But</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_17"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_14'>2 Cor. 6. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_17"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_27'>Prov. 29. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_19"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB6_5'>Job 6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='AMO.xhtml#AM8_4'>Amos 8. 4</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS14_4'>Ps. 14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_22"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_15'>Eccles. 9. 15</a>, <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_16'>16</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_28'>ch. 26. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_22"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_17'>ch. 19. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_12'>38. 12</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_9'>Job 29. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_25"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_18'>ch. 12. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_25"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_13'>Prov. 15. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_26"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC12_12'>Eccles. 12. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_8'>ch. 25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_8'>ch. 25. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_16'>ch. 19. 16</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM3_2'>Jam. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_12'>ch. 12. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_21'>20. 21</a> marg. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_10'>Susanna 10</a> (Gk.). <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_37'>Acts 2. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sorrow</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_22'>Rom. 14. 22</a>. <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN3_21'>1 John 3. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_19'>ch. 11. 19</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_15'>ver. 15</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS39_6'>Ps. 39. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_20'>Prov. 27. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_18'>ch. 12. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_6'>Prov. 23. 6</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_7'>7</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_13'>ch. 31. 13</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_23'>Matt. 6. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_9'>Prov. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>. So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_13'>Luke 14. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Supplied from <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_32'>ch. 7. 32</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_16'>15. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_24'>Eccles. 2. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the feast-day</span>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_14'>Eccles. 7. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_15"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_19'>ch. 11. 19</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_15'>ver. 15</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS39_6'>Ps. 39. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_26'>Ps. 102. 26</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB1_11'>Heb. 1. 11</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_2'>Job 14. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_17'>Gen. 2. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_17'>Matt. 16. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_4'>Eccles. 1. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_2'>Ps. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_21"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_12'>Wisd. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_23'>ch. 21. 23</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK24_12'>Luke 24. 12</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_5'>John 20. 5</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_11'>11</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_34'>Prov. 8. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>stake</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_12'>ch. 26. 12</a> marg. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_2'>27. 2</a>. Gk. as <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_21'>Judg. 4. 21</a>, <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_22'>22</a>. &amp; <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG5_26'>5. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_24"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER9_8'>Ezra 9. 8</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_25"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS25_13'>Ps. 25. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR14_27"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS4_6'>Isai. 4. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS25_4'>25. 4</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_17'>Wisd. 10. 17</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_16'>ch. 34. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E213_55'>2 Esdr. 13. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_1'>Isai. 55. 1</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_21'>ch. 24. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_1'>Isai. 55. 1</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_21'>ch. 24. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN4_10'>John 4. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_11'>ch. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>A parable</span>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_20'>ch. 20. 20</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_7'>Prov. 26. 7</a>. Or, <span class='add'>he was not sent of, &amp;c</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or rather, <span class='add'>a parable</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or rather, <span class='add'>a parable</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_10"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_1'>Ps. 33. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_13'>Jam. 1. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_12"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_13'>Jam. 1. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_14"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_26'>Gen. 1. 26</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_14"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_16'>Gen. 2. 16</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_17'>Matt 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_16"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_15'>Josh. 24. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_17"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR21_8'>Jer. 21. 8</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_19'>Deut. 30. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_5'>Ps. 147. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_19"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_15'>ch. 17. 15</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_19'>19</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_18'>Ps. 33. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_19'>ch. 23. 19</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_13'>Heb. 4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR15_20"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_30'>Matt. 25. 30</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_10'>Luke 17. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>tribe</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_6"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_9'>ch. 21. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>hath been</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_4'>Gen. 6. 4</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_6'>Wisd. 14. 6</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_26'>Baruch 3. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_8"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_24'>Gen. 19. 24</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_14'>Wisd. 19. 14</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_49'>Ezek. 16. 49</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_50'>50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_49'>Ezek. 16. 49</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_50'>50</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_15'>Numb. 14. 15</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_35'>35</a>. &amp; <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_21'>16. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_6'>21. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_64'>26. 64</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_46'>Num. 1. 46</a>. Comp. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_51'>Num. 26. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_6'>ch. 5. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_30'>ch. 51. 30</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>Ps. 62. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_4'>ch. 5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_30'>ch. 51. 30</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>Ps. 62. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_3'>Ex. 7. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_4'>14. 4</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_8'>8</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_17'>Rom. 9. 17</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_4'>Gen. 1. 4</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>strong partition</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK3_9'>Ezek. 3. 9</a>. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC7_12'>Zech. 7. 12</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_7'>Ps. 139. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_27'>1 Kin. 8. 27</a>. So <a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_18'>2 Chr. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_7'>2 Pet. 3. 7</a>, <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_14'>ch 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_19"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS18_7'>Ps. 18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_19"><span class="notemark">t</span> 16.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_18'>Isai. 24. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_33'>Rom. 11. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_21"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_32'>ch. 43. 32</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_2'>Prov. 25. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>ch. 25. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_24"><span class="notemark">z</span> 16.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_20'>Prov. 4. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_25"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_20'>Wisd. 11. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_25"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_3'>Acts 22. 3</a> (Gk.). So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC26_5'>Acts 26. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_26"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS111_7'>Ps. 111. 7</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS111_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_27"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_21'>ch. 42. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>beginnings</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_28"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_8'>Ps. 148. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_29"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_29'>Gen. 1. 29–31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_30"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_25'>Gen. 1. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_30"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.30</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_1'>ch. 17. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>Gen. 1. 27</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_1'>Wisd. 7. 1</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>. So <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_20'>Eccles. 3. 20</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_3'>Wisd. 2. 3</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_30'>ch. 16. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_1'>Job 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB16_22'>Job 16. 22</a> and marg. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_13'>ch. 41. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 17.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_26'>Gen. 1. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 17.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_2'>Gen. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of him</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 17.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_28'>Gen. 1. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Same word in Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 17.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Same word in Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_13'>ver. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_4'>ch. 18. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_21'>42. 21</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_17'>2 Macc. 7. 17</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_49'>Luke 1. 49</a> <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_11'>Acts 2. 11</a> the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB8_15'>Tobit 8. 15</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_21'>Esth. 16. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 17.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_13'>ver. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_4'>ch. 18. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_21'>42. 21</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M27_17'>2 Macc. 7. 17</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_49'>Luke 1. 49</a> <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_11'>Acts 2. 11</a> the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_14"><span class="notemark">l</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_0'>Ex. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_0'>ch. 21</a>–<a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_0'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 17.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_19'>ch. 15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN8_21'>Gen. 8. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK11_19'>Ezek. 11. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 17.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_8'>Deut. 32. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 17.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_1'>Rom. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 17.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_20'>Deut. 4. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_15'>10. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_9'>32. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_58'>2 Esdr. 6. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 17.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_19'>ch. 15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 17.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT31_6'>Deut. 31. 6</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT31_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_12'>ch. 29. 12</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_13'>13</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_22"><span class="notemark">x</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_24'>Jer. 22. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_22"><span class="notemark">y</span> 17.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_10'>Deut. 32. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 17.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_34'>Matt. 25. 34</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_35'>35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_23"><span class="notemark">a</span> 17.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_31'>Prov. 11. 31</a>. Comp. <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_7'>Joel 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_24"><span class="notemark">b</span> 17.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_19'>Acts 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_25"><span class="notemark">c</span> 17.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR3_12'>Jer. 3. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>lessen</span> thy <span class="notemark">d</span> <span class='add'>offence</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_25"><span class="notemark">e</span> 17.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAN.xhtml#PN1_1'>Prayer of Manasses</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>illumination</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_11'>ch. 25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_27"><span class="notemark">f</span> 17.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS6_5'>Ps. 6. 5</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_17'>Baruch 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_28"><span class="notemark">g</span> 17.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS38_19'>Isai. 38. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_31"><span class="notemark">h</span> 17.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB25_4'>Job 25. 4–6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_32"><span class="notemark">i</span> 17.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_9'>ch. 10. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_3'>40. 3</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB30_19'>Job 30. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_1'>Gen. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_35'>Deut. 4. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_13'>Isai. 48. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_23'>ch. 42. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_10'>Lev. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_17'>ch. 42. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_2'>Ps. 106. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_8'>ch. 17. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_18'>ch. 2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_18'>ch. 2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_6"><span class="notemark">j</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_21'>ch. 42. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 18.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_31'>1 Macc. 3. 31</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 18.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS90_10'>Ps. 90. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_2'>ch. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS90_4'>Ps. 90. 4</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_8'>2 Pet. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_18'>ch. 35. 18</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_7'>Luke 18. 7</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_7'>James 5. 7</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_11'>ch. 9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_13'>Ps. 103. 13</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_9'>Ps. 145. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_13"><span class="notemark">s</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_10'>Jer. 31. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_15'>ch. 20. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_22'>41. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_2'>Deut. 32. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 18.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_28'>Luke 1. 28</a> (Gk.) marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 18.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_15'>ch. 20. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_22'>41. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_20"><span class="notemark">y</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_28'>1 Cor. 11. 28</a>, <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_31'>31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>Wisd. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 18.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_17'>ch. 7. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 18.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_21'>Deut. 23. 21</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_4'>Eccles. 5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 18.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_1'>Eccles. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_17'>ch. 7. 17</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_36'>36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_24"><span class="notemark">e</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_26'>ch. 11. 26</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_25"><span class="notemark">f</span> 18.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_25'>ch. 11. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_27"><span class="notemark">g</span> 18.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_14'>Prov. 28. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_29"><span class="notemark">h</span> 18.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_27'>ch. 50. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_29"><span class="notemark">i</span> 18.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>. [Temperance of soul].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_30"><span class="notemark">j</span> 18.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_8'>ch. 31. 8</a>. So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM6_6'>Rom. 6. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_14'>13. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_30"><span class="notemark">k</span> 18.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_27'>Rom. 1. 27</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_17'>Prov. 21. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_1"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_4'>ch. 42. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS4_11'>Hos. 4. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_21'>Gen. 9. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_32'>19. 32</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS4_11'>Hos. 4. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_21'>Gen. 9. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_32'>19. 32</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_1'>1 Kings 11. 1–4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C16_16'>1 Cor. 6. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_19'>Matt. 6. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS22_11'>Josh. 22. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_36'>Prov. 8. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_14'>Wisd. 12. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_14'>ver. 14</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_23'>ch. 41. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of friend or foe</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_13'>ch. 22. 13</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_26'>26</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_15'>2 Tim. 4. 15</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shew his hatred</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_19'>Job 32. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>heart</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_21'>ch. 51. 21</a>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_27'>Prov. 20. 27</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_30'>30</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_14'>ch. 21. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_5'>33. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_17'>Lev. 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Reprove</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_13'>ver. 13</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_15'>15</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_17'>17</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_15'>Matt. 18. 15</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 19.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_14'>ver. 14</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_23'>ch. 41. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_1'>ch. 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>willingly</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Reprove</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>Prov. 1. 7</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_26'>ch. 40. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of receiving</span> him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_28'>ch. 23. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_12'>2 Esdr. 2. 12</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_18'>Prov. 3. 18</a>. Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E27_53'>2 Esdr. 7. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_29'>Matt. 21. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>judgeth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_26"><span class="notemark">s</span> 19.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_11'>ch. 12. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in black</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_27"><span class="notemark">s</span> 19.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_11'>ch. 12. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_30"><span class="notemark">t</span> 19.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_20'>ch. 21. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 20.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_19'>19</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_20'>20</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_11'>Prov. 25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>seasonable</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_20'>ch. 35. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_1"><span class="notemark">e</span> 20.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 20.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_13'>Prov. 28. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 20.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB10_26'>Heb. 10. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 20.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_20'>ch. 30. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 20.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 20.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_7'>Eccles. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_4'>ch. 32. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 20.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_7'>Eccles. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 20.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_32'>Prov. 1. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 20.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_4'>ch. 29. 4</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_6'>6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 20.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_12'>Matt. 23. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 20.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_5'>ch. 6. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>pleasant conceits</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN625"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_16'>ch. 21. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN626"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.13</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or,] <span class='add'>lost</span>, or, <span class='add'>spilt</span>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_14'>Ps. 22. 14</a>. <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_11'>Lam. 2. 11</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN627"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_2'>1 Pet. 5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN628"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>For his eyes</span> are <span class='add'>many for one to receive</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN629"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 20.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_18'>ch. 18. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_22'>41. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN630"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 20.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_2'>Matt. 6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN631"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 20.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_9'>Ps. 41. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN632"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_17"><span class="notemark">rr</span> 20.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_1'>ch. 27. 1</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN633"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 20.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_7'>ch. 21. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN634"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>An unpleasant fellow</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN635"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_19"><span class="notemark">t</span> 20.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_6'>ch. 22. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN636"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_9'>ch. 15. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN637"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_20"><span class="notemark">a</span> 20.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_19'>19</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_20'>20</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_11'>Prov. 25. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN638"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>shall not be pricked</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_1'>ch. 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN639"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_22"><span class="notemark">v</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_21'>ch. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>42. 1</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN640"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_22"><span class="notemark">v</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_21'>ch. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>42. 1</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN641"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_22"><span class="notemark">v</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_21'>ch. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>42. 1</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN642"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 20.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_17'>Deut. 10. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN643"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_23"><span class="notemark">v</span> 20.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_21'>ch. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>42. 1</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN644"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 20.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>ch. 25. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN645"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 20.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_30'>Prov. 6. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN646"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ignominy</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN647"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.27</a>
 <span class="ft">[Proverbs].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN648"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 20.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_0'>Prov. 12</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_0'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN649"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 20.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_8'>Ex. 23. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN650"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as a muzzle in the mouth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN651"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_30"><span class="notemark">b</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_13'>Wisd. 7. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_14'>ch. 41. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN652"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_30"><span class="notemark">c</span> 20.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_10'>ch. 29. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN653"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_31"><span class="notemark">d</span> 20.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_15'>ch. 41. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN654"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_31"><span class="notemark">b</span> 20.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_13'>Wisd. 7. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_14'>ch. 41. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN655"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_31"><span class="notemark">d</span> 20.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_15'>ch. 41. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN656"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 21.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_5'>ch. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN657"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 21.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_4'>Ps. 41. 4</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK15_21'>Luke 15. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN658"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_32'>Prov. 23. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN659"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_32'>Prov. 23. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN660"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 21.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_11'>Wisd. 1. 11</a>. So <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK13_19'>Ezek. 13. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN661"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 21.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS149_6'>Ps. 149. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN662"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 21.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_9'>Ex. 3. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_23'>22. 23</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_6'>Ps. 34. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN663"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 21.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_1'>Prov. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN664"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>be converted</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_2'>ch. 49. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN665"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 21.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_18'>ch. 20. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN666"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 21.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_13'>Jer. 22. 13</a>? Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_27'>Prov. 24. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN667"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_6'>ch. 16. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN668"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 21.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_31'>Isai. 1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN669"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_10'>Isai. 62. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN670"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 21.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_12'>Prov. 12. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN671"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 21.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_17'>John 7. 17</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_12'>Wisd. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN672"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>Prov. 1. 7</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN673"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>witty</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_20'>ver. 20</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_32'>ch. 6. 32</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_27'>22. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_19'>37. 19</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN674"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_18'>Eccles. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN675"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>subtilty</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_25'>ch. 19. 25</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_10'>34. 10</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_18'>ch. 42. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN676"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 21.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_25'>ch. 24. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN677"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_12'>ch. 19. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_5'>33. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_21'>51. 21</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN678"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 21.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_38'>Jer. 48. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN679"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 21.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_9'>Prov. 9. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN680"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_15"><span class="notemark">v</span> 21.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_9'>1 Kin. 14. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN681"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_16"><span class="notemark">w</span> 21.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_15'>ch. 22. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN682"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_16"><span class="notemark">x</span> 21.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_13'>ch. 12. 13</a> &amp; marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN683"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>not to be inquired after</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN684"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_20"><span class="notemark">y</span> 21.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_30'>ch. 19. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN685"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 21.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN686"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 21.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_4'>Judith 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN687"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 21.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_17'>Prov. 25. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN688"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 21.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_23'>ch. 14. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN689"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_25"><span class="notemark">d</span> 21.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_25'>ch. 28. 25</a>. See <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_27'>Dan. 5. 27</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN690"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_26"><span class="notemark">e</span> 21.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_33'>Prov. 14. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN691"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_27"><span class="notemark">f</span> 21.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R121_1'>1 Chr. 21. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN692"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_27"><span class="notemark">g</span> 21.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_44'>John 8. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN693"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_28"><span class="notemark">h</span> 21.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_14'>ch. 5. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_13'>28. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN694"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 22.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_1'>Prov. 10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN695"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_22'>Prov. 13. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN696"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shall be the heir of her husband</span>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_23'>Prov. 30. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN697"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_19'>ch. 20. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN698"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_25'>ch. 38. 25</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN699"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 22.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_20'>Prov. 25. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN700"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>an art</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN701"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 22.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_16'>ch. 38. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN702"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_12"><span class="notemark">g</span> 22.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_24'>Judith 16. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN703"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_12'>ch. 12. 12</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_9'>ch. 19. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN704"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>when he shakes off</span> his <span class='add'>filth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN705"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_28'>ch. 6. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN706"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>wearied</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN707"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 22.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_3'>Prov. 27. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN708"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 22.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_16'>ch. 21. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN709"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 22.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_6'>Ps. 112. 6</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN710"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK13_10'>Ezek. 13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN711"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of a polished wall</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN712"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_18"><span class="notemark">nn</span> 22.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN713"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_26'>Deut. 28. 26</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_33'>Jer. 7. 33</a>. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC1_21'>Zech. 1. 21</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN714"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_20"><span class="notemark">p</span> 22.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_22'>ch. 41. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN715"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 22.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_16'>ch. 27. 16</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_17'>17</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_21'>21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_23'>41. 23</a> in the Gk. So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_13'>Prov. 11. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN716"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_26"><span class="notemark">h</span> 22.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_12'>ch. 12. 12</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_9'>ch. 19. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN717"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_27"><span class="notemark">r</span> 22.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_25'>ch. 28. 25</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS141_3'>Ps. 141. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN718"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_27"><span class="notemark">s</span> 22.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_12'>ch. 19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN719"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 23.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB3_3'>Tobit 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN720"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 23.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB3_3'>Tobit 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN721"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 23.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_9'>ch. 26. 9</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_17'>Prov. 6. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN722"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>giant-like</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN723"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[Discipline of the mouth].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN724"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_9"><span class="notemark">c</span> 23.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_7'>Ex. 20. 7</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_14'>ch. 27. 14</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_33'>Matt. 5. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN725"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_10"><span class="notemark">d</span> 23.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_17'>ch. 28. 17</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_24'>1 Pet. 2. 24</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN726"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_11"><span class="notemark">e</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_10'>2 Sam. 12. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN727"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV5_1'>Lev. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN728"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>justified</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_22'>ch. 1. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_22'>18. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_5'>31. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN729"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 23.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN730"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_12"><span class="notemark">h</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_16'>Lev. 24. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN731"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 23.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_22'>2 Pet. 2. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN732"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_14"><span class="notemark">j</span> 23.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_3'>Job 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN733"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 23.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S216_7'>2 Sam. 16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN734"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_16"><span class="notemark">l</span> 23.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_1'>ch. 25. 1</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_7'>7</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_5'>26. 5</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_28'>28</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_18'>37. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_25'>50. 25</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_16'>Prov. 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN735"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 23.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN736"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 23.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='COL.xhtml#CL1_22'>Col. 1. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN737"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 23.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_17'>Prov. 9. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN738"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN739"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 23.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB24_15'>Job 24. 15</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_9'>Prov. 7. 9</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_13'>Job 22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN740"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 23.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_21'>Prov. 5. 21</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_19'>ch. 15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN741"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_20"><span class="notemark">r</span> 23.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_31'>Gen. 1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN742"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 23.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_10'>Lev. 20. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN743"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a stranger</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN744"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_23"><span class="notemark">t</span> 23.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_14'>Ex. 20. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN745"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a stranger</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN746"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 23.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_24'>Gen. 38. 24</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN38_25'>25</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_4'>John 8. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN747"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>visitation</span>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>Wisd. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN748"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 23.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_2'>Deut. 23. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN749"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 23.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_3'>Wisd. 4. 3</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_16'>Job 18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN750"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_28"><span class="notemark">yy</span> 23.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_18'>ch. 19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN751"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 23.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_16'>Ps. 91. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN752"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">The praise of Wisdom.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN753"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 24.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN754"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 24.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN755"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a mist</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_4'>Wisd. 2. 4</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_22'>ch. 43. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN756"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 24.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_3'>Ps. 104. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN757"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 24.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_14'>Job 22. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN758"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_8"><span class="notemark">d</span> 24.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_14'>John 1. 14</a>. So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_37'>Baruch 3. 37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN759"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 24.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_22'>Prov. 8. 22</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_23'>23</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_1'>John 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN760"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 24.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_3'>Ex. 31. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX35_31'>35. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN761"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 24.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K17_14'>1 Kin. 7. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN762"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 24.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS132_8'>Ps. 132. 8</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS132_13'>13</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS132_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN763"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>holy</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_13'>ch. 36. 13</a>. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS5_0'>Song 5</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_7'>1 Macc. 2. 7</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB13_9'>Tobit 13. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN764"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 24.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_15'>Judg. 9. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_7'>Judith 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN765"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 24.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_10'>ch. 50. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_14'>Isai. 44. 14</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN766"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 24.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_9'>Deut. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN767"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_14"><span class="notemark">l</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_12'>ch. 50. 12</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS92_12'>Ps. 92. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN768"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Cades</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_63'>1 Macc. 11. 63</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M111_73'>73</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN769"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_14"><span class="notemark">m</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_62'>Josh. 15. 62</a>. &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S123_29'>1 Sam. 23. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN770"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_1'>Cant. 2. 1</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_1'>Isai. 35. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_13'>ch. 39. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_8'>50. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN771"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_14"><span class="notemark">j</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_10'>ch. 50. 10</a>. Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_14'>Isai. 44. 14</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN772"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in the water</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN773"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_23'>Ex. 30. 23</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_17'>Prov. 7. 17</a>. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_14'>Cant. 4. 14</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_13'>Rev. 18. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN774"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_39'>John 19. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN775"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_34'>Ex. 30. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN776"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_34'>Ex. 30. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN777"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_14'>ch. 39. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_8'>50. 8</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_9'>9</a>(Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN778"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 24.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_36'>Ex. 30. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN779"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 24.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN35_4'>Gen. 35. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN780"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 24.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN15_1'>John 15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN781"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>chosen</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN782"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_19"><span class="notemark">x</span> 24.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_1'>Isai. 55. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN783"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_20"><span class="notemark">y</span> 24.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_10'>Ps. 19. 10</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN784"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_21"><span class="notemark">x</span> 24.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_1'>Isai. 55. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN785"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_21"><span class="notemark">z</span> 24.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_3'>ch. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN786"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_23"><span class="notemark">a</span> 24.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_1'>Ex. 20. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_3'>24. 3</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_1'>Deut. 4. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_1'>29. 1</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_2'>2</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_4'>33. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN787"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_24"><span class="notemark">b</span> 24.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_3'>ch. 2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN788"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_24"><span class="notemark">c</span> 24.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_21'>Isai. 45. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN789"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_24"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 24.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN790"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_25"><span class="notemark">d</span> 24.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_13'>ch. 21. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN791"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_25"><span class="notemark">e</span> 24.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_11'>Gen. 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN792"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_25"><span class="notemark">f</span> 24.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB6_1'>Tobit 6. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN793"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_25"><span class="notemark">g</span> 24.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_14'>Gen. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN794"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_26"><span class="notemark">g</span> 24.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_14'>Gen. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN795"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_26"><span class="notemark">h</span> 24.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_15'>Josh. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN796"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_27"><span class="notemark">i</span> 24.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_13'>Gen. 2. 13</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_18'>Jer. 2. 18</a> (Gk. not Heb.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN797"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>drain</span>, or, <span class='add'>ditch</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN798"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_30"><span class="notemark">j</span> 24.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_17'>2 Kin. 18. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_20'>20. 20</a>. Comp. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK31_4'>Ezek. 31. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN799"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_30"><span class="notemark">k</span> 24.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_8'>Gen. 2. 8</a>. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_4'>Susanna 4</a> (Gk.), <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_7'>7</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>15</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_17'>17</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>18</a>, &amp;c. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK23_43'>Luke 23. 43</a>. Gk. not as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_31'>ver. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN800"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_33"><span class="notemark">l</span> 24.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_6'>Rom. 12. 6</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_7'>7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN801"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_33"><span class="notemark">l</span> 24.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_6'>Rom. 12. 6</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM12_7'>7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN802"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_34"><span class="notemark">m</span> 24.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_17'>ch. 33. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN803"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_7'>7</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN804"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>gloried</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN805"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_1"><span class="notemark">g</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_1'>ver. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_18'>ch. 26. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN806"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_2'>Gen. 13. 2</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_5'>5</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_8'>8</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS133_1'>Ps. 133. 1</a>. See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_1'>Heb. 13. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN807"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>Lev. 19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN808"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_1"><span class="notemark">d</span> 25.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_29'>Prov. 11. 29</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN809"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_7'>7</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN810"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_2"><span class="notemark">e</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_24'>ch. 20. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN811"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_2"><span class="notemark">f</span> 25.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_23'>ch. 16. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN812"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 25.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_1'>ver. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_18'>ch. 26. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN813"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 25.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_1'>ver. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_18'>ch. 26. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN814"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 25.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_6'>Prov. 17. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN815"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 25.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_31'>Prov. 16. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN816"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_7"><span class="notemark">a</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_7'>7</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN817"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_7"><span class="notemark">m</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN818"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_7"><span class="notemark">j</span> 25.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_43'>Matt. 5. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN819"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 25.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_1'>ch. 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN820"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a friend</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN821"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 25.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_13'>Prov. 3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN822"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN823"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_26'>ch. 17. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN824"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to whom</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN825"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 25.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN4_18'>1 John 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN826"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 25.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_23'>ver. 23</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_14'>Prov. 18. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN827"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 25.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_19'>ver. 19</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_28'>Eccles. 7. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN828"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN829"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 25.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN830"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 25.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_7'>ch. 26. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS10_4'>Hos. 10. 4</a> (Heb.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN831"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 25.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_9'>Prov. 21. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN832"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 25.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_14'>ch. 42. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN833"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>like a bear</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN834"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 25.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_19'>ver. 19</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_28'>Eccles. 7. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN835"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>scolding</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_27'>ch. 26. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN836"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_21"><span class="notemark">v</span> 25.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_12'>ch. 42. 12</a>. Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S211_2'>2 Sam. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN837"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_23"><span class="notemark">t</span> 25.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_9'>Prov. 21. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN838"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_23"><span class="notemark">p</span> 25.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_23'>ver. 23</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_14'>Prov. 18. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN839"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_23"><span class="notemark">w</span> 25.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_12'>ch. 2. 12</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_12'>Heb. 12. 12</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN840"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 25.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_13'>ch. 42. 13</a>? See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_6'>Gen. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN841"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 25.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_14'>Prov. 17. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_8'>ch. 26. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN842"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 25.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_14'>Prov. 17. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_8'>ch. 26. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN843"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_26"><span class="notemark">z</span> 25.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_1'>Deut. 24. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN844"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 26.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR31_10'>Prov. 31. 10</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN845"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 26.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_1'>ver. 1</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_22'>Prov. 18. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN846"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 26.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_15'>ch. 28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN847"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 26.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_1'>ver. 1</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_22'>Prov. 18. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN848"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN849"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>An evil report</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_15'>ch. 19. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_9'>28. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN850"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_6"><span class="notemark">dd</span> 26.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_11'>ch. 37. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN851"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a yoke of oxen</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN852"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 26.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_15'>ch. 25. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN853"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 26.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_11'>Prov. 7. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_25'>ch. 25. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN854"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 26.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_4'>ch. 23. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN855"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 26.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_11'>ch. 42. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN856"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 26.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN857"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>stake</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_24'>ch. 14. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN858"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 26.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_30'>Prov. 15. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN859"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in the highest</span> places <span class='add'>of the Lord</span>. Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN23_6'>Gen. 23. 6</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN860"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_16"><span class="notemark">c</span> 26.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_1'>ver. 1</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_22'>Prov. 18. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN861"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ornament</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_30'>ch. 6. 30</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN862"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_17"><span class="notemark">k</span> 26.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_31'>Ex. 25. 31–37</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN863"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in constant</span> <span class="notemark">l</span> <span class='add'>age</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN864"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>comely</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_4'>ch. 25. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN865"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>breast</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN866"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 26.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_15'>Prov. 5. 15–17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN867"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 26.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_9'>Wisd. 4. 9</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN868"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a swine</span>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_22'>Prov. 11. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN869"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_22"><span class="notemark">n</span> 26.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_9'>ch. 9. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN870"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_22"><span class="notemark">o</span> 26.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_8'>Prov. 17. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_13'>25. 13</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN871"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_24"><span class="notemark">p</span> 26.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_33'>Eph. 5. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN872"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_25"><span class="notemark">i</span> 26.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_25'>ver. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN873"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_27"><span class="notemark">q</span> 26.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_20'>ch. 25. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN874"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_28"><span class="notemark">d</span> 26.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN875"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_28"><span class="notemark">r</span> 26.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_15'>Eccles. 9. 15</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN876"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_28"><span class="notemark">s</span> 26.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_8'>Phil. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN877"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_28"><span class="notemark">t</span> 26.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_24'>Ezek. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN878"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_28"><span class="notemark">u</span> 26.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_11'>Isai. 65. 11</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN879"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_29"><span class="notemark">w</span> 26.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_2'>ch. 27. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_11'>37. 11</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_14'>Prov. 20. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN880"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_29"><span class="notemark">x</span> 26.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM6_7'>Rom. 6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN881"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_21'>Prov. 28. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN882"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a</span> thing <span class='add'>indifferent</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_18'>ch. 7. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_17'>20. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_5'>42. 5</a> in the Gk. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_35'>2 Macc. 1. 35</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN883"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 27.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_4'>Prov. 23. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN884"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 27.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_24'>ch. 14. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN885"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 27.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_29'>ch. 26. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN886"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_8'>Phil. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN887"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>thought</span>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_15'>Rom. 2. 15</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C210_5'>2 Cor. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN888"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_4"><span class="notemark">i</span> 27.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN889"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 27.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_3'>Prov. 17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN890"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_5"><span class="notemark">k</span> 27.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN891"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 27.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_20'>Wisd. 7. 20</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_35'>Luke 2. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN892"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 27.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_17'>Matt. 7. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN893"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN894"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 27.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN895"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_14'>Job 29. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN896"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_14'>Job 29. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN897"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 27.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_2'>Ex. 28. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN898"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 27.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_26'>ch. 36. 26</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_12'>Luke 9. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_7'>19. 7</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN899"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 27.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_28'>ver. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN900"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 27.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_6'>Matt. 7. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN901"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 27.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T15_6'>1 Tim. 5. 6</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_5'>James 5. 5</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN902"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 27.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_9'>ch. 23. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN903"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_16"><span class="notemark">s</span> 27.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_22'>ch. 22. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN904"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 27.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_22'>ch. 22. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN905"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 27.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_73'>Matt. 26. 73</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN906"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 27.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN907"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_19"><span class="notemark">x</span> 27.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS124_7'>Ps. 124. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN908"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 27.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN909"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_21"><span class="notemark">y</span> 27.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E19_20'>1 Esdr. 9. 20</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN910"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 27.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_22'>ch. 22. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN911"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 27.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_73'>Matt. 26. 73</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN912"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_22"><span class="notemark">z</span> 27.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_13'>Prov. 6. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN913"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_23"><span class="notemark">a</span> 27.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS55_21'>Ps. 55. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN914"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>alter his speech</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN915"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_25"><span class="notemark">b</span> 27.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_8'>Prov. 10. 8</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN916"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_26"><span class="notemark">c</span> 27.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS7_15'>Ps. 7. 15</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_29'>ver. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN917"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 27.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_29'>ver. 29</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_15'>Ps. 9. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS35_8'>35. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN918"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_28"><span class="notemark">e</span> 27.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_1'>ch. 28. 1</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_35'>Deut. 32. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN919"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_28"><span class="notemark">f</span> 27.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN920"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_29"><span class="notemark">d</span> 27.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_29'>ver. 29</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_15'>Ps. 9. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS35_8'>35. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN921"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR27_30"><span class="notemark">g</span> 27.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_5'>ch. 28. 5</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN922"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 28.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_35'>Deut. 32. 35</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_28'>ch. 27. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN923"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 28.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_14'>Matt. 6. 14</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_25'>Mark 11. 25</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_37'>Luke 6. 37</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN924"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 28.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_23'>Matt. 18. 23–35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN925"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 28.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_30'>ch. 27. 30</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN926"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 28.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_36'>ch. 7. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN927"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 28.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_30'>ch. 27. 30</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN928"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 28.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_11'>ch. 30. 11</a>. So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC17_30'>Acts 17. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN929"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 28.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_1'>ch. 8. 1</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN930"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 28.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_5'>ch. 26. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN931"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 28.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_21'>Prov. 26. 21</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_3'>ch. 8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN932"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 28.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JAS.xhtml#JM3_5'>James 3. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN933"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 28.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_10'>ch. 8. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN934"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 28.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_20'>Prov. 26. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN935"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 28.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_14'>ch. 5. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_28'>21. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN936"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_13"><span class="notemark">o</span> 28.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN937"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>third</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN938"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 28.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_2'>ch. 26. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN939"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 28.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_10'>ch. 23. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN940"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 28.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT2_27'>Judith 2. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN941"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_20"><span class="notemark">s</span> 28.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_30'>Matt. 11. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN942"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 28.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_5'>ch. 26. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN943"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 28.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS31_20'>Ps. 31. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN944"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_23"><span class="notemark">v</span> 28.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_8'>Cant. 4. 8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN945"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_24"><span class="notemark">w</span> 28.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_25'>ch. 36. 25</a>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_19'>Prov. 15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN946"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 28.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_35'>Gen. 42. 35</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_20'>Prov. 7. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN947"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_25'>ch. 21. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN948"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR28_25"><span class="notemark">z</span> 28.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_27'>ch. 22. 27</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS141_3'>Ps. 141. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN949"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_26'>Ps. 37. 26</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_42'>Matt. 5. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN950"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 29.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_35'>Lev. 25. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN951"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 29.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_26'>Ps. 37. 26</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_42'>Matt. 5. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN952"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 29.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_12'>ch. 8. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN953"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 29.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_9'>ch. 20. 9</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN954"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 29.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_10'>Matt. 26. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN955"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>If he be able</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN956"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 29.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_6'>ver. 6</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_9'>ch. 20. 9</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN957"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 29.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_8'>Deut. 15. 8</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN958"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 29.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_30'>ch. 20. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN959"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 29.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_20'>Matt. 6. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN960"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 29.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN4_27'>Dan. 4. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN961"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 29.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_21'>Matt. 19. 21</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC10_4'>Acts 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN962"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 29.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN963"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 29.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_24'>Luke 12. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN964"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 29.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_24'>ch. 40. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN965"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fail</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN966"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 29.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_5'>Matt. 19. 5</a> (Gk.), &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN967"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 29.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_44'>Mark 12. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN968"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 29.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_1'>Prov. 6. 1</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_13'>ch. 8. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN969"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_21"><span class="notemark">q</span> 29.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_26'>39. 26</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN970"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 29.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_6'>1 Tim. 6. 6</a>, <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN971"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 29.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_6'>1 Tim. 6. 6</a>, <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN972"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_26"><span class="notemark">s</span> 29.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_37'>Luke 12. 37</a>. &amp; <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_7'>17. 7</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN973"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_27"><span class="notemark">t</span> 29.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK14_9'>Luke 14. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN974"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_28"><span class="notemark">u</span> 29.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_26'>ver. 26</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN975"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_28"><span class="notemark">x</span> 29.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_20'>ver. 20</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN976"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Of children.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN977"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 30.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_5'>ch. 42. 5</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_24'>Prov. 13. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN978"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 30.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN979"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>good by him</span>. <a href='PHM.xhtml#PM1_20'>Philem. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN980"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>kinsfolk</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN981"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 30.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_7'>Deut. 6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN982"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 30.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS128_6'>Ps. 128. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN983"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 30.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS127_5'>Ps. 127. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN984"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>astonished</span>. See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_15'>Mark 9. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN985"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_10"><span class="notemark">b</span> 30.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN986"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 30.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_7'>ch. 28. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN987"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_12"><span class="notemark">g</span> 30.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_23'>ch. 7. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN988"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 30.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_25'>ch. 33. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN989"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Of health.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN990"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_18"><span class="notemark">i</span> 30.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_17'>Tobit 4. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN991"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_19"><span class="notemark">k</span> 30.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_7'>Bel and Dragon 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN992"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_19"><span class="notemark">l</span> 30.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_10'>Lev. 4. 10</a>, &amp;c. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_16'>ch. 45. 16</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN993"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 30.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_6'>Ps. 115. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN994"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>afflicted</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN995"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 30.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_4'>ch. 20. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN996"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 30.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_25'>Prov. 12. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN997"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_22'>Prov. 17. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN998"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>exultation</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_28'>ch. 31. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN999"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_23"><span class="notemark">q</span> 30.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_18'>ch. 38. 18</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C27_10'>2 Cor. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1000"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>A noble</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_23'>ch. 31. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1001"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_25"><span class="notemark">r</span> 30.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG19_6'>Judg. 19. 6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1002"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 31.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_9'>1 Tim. 6. 9</a>, <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1003"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 31.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_22'>Matt. 13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1004"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 31.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_19'>ch. 11. 19</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_19'>Luke 12. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1005"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 31.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_20'>Prov. 28. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1006"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 31.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_2'>ch. 8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1007"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 31.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_5'>Eph. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1008"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_24'>Luke 6. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1009"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 31.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_30'>ch. 18. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1010"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 31.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS141_4'>Ps. 141. 4</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_1'>Prov. 23. 1–3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1011"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 31.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_29'>ch. 37. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1012"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>open not thy throat upon it</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1013"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 31.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_10'>ch. 14. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1014"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>before every thing that is presented</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1015"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_14"><span class="notemark">jj</span> 31.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_18'>ver. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1016"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 31.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_23'>Matt. 26. 23</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_20'>Mark 14. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1017"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 31.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_12'>Matt. 7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1018"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 31.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK10_8'>Luke 10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1019"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 31.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_29'>ch. 37. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1020"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_18"><span class="notemark">jj</span> 31.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_18'>ver. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1021"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>And lieth not puffing and blowing</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1022"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 31.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_30'>ch. 37. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1023"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 31.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_8'>Isai. 28. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1024"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 31.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1025"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_22"><span class="notemark">qq</span> 31.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_29'>Prov. 22. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1026"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 31.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_9'>Prov. 22. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1027"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 31.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_25'>ch. 30. 25</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1028"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_23"><span class="notemark">t</span> 31.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_18'>Ps. 49. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1029"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_25"><span class="notemark">u</span> 31.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_22'>Isai. 5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1030"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_25"><span class="notemark">v</span> 31.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_2'>Judith 13. 2</a>, <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1031"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_27"><span class="notemark">w</span> 31.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_31'>ver. 31</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_20'>ch. 40. 20</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_19'>Eccles. 10. 19</a>. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_20'>1 Esdr. 3. 20</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_15'>Ps. 104. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1032"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_27"><span class="notemark">w</span> 31.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_31'>ver. 31</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_20'>ch. 40. 20</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_19'>Eccles. 10. 19</a>. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_20'>1 Esdr. 3. 20</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_15'>Ps. 104. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1033"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_27"><span class="notemark">y</span> 31.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_28'>28</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_17'>Acts 14. 17</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1034"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 31.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_28'>28</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_17'>Acts 14. 17</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1035"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_29"><span class="notemark">x</span> 31.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_1'>Prov. 20. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1036"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_31"><span class="notemark">w</span> 31.31</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_31'>ver. 31</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_20'>ch. 40. 20</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_19'>Eccles. 10. 19</a>. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_20'>1 Esdr. 3. 20</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_15'>Ps. 104. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1037"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_31"><span class="notemark">y</span> 31.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_27'>ver. 27</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_28'>28</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_17'>Acts 14. 17</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1038"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_31"><span class="notemark">z</span> 31.31</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET1_8'>Esther 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1039"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 32.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN2_8'>John 2. 8</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN2_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1040"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 32.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB2_1'>Tobit 2. 1</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_37'>Luke 11. 37</a>, &amp;c. in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1041"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 32.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_8'>Wisd. 2. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1042"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 32.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1043"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 32.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_7'>ch. 20. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_7'>Eccles. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1044"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 32.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_1'>ch. 49. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1045"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 32.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TOB.xhtml#TB13_17'>Tobit 13. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1046"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 32.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_19'>Rev. 21. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1047"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 32.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1048"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 32.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_6'>Job 32. 6</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_14'>ch. 7. 14</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1049"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 32.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_10'>Deut. 8. 10</a>. So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T14_3'>1 Tim. 4. 3</a>, <a href='1TI.xhtml#T14_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1050"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 32.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_22'>ch. 39. 22</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_7'>Isai. 34. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1051"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_14"><span class="notemark">l</span> 32.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_5'>ch. 39. 5</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_28'>Wisd. 16. 28</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_36'>ch. 6. 36</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_12'>ch. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1052"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 32.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_6'>ch. 39. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1053"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 32.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_2'>ch. 33. 2</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_20'>Luke 20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1054"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 32.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_6'>Ps. 37. 6</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_18'>Prov. 4. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1055"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 32.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_17'>Ps. 50. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1056"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 32.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_29'>ch. 33. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1057"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_19"><span class="notemark">u</span> 32.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_19'>ver. 19</a>. Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_5'>Rom. 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1058"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_20"><span class="notemark">r</span> 32.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS141_6'>Ps. 141. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1059"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 32.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_32'>1 Cor. 10. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1060"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_22"><span class="notemark">t</span> 32.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_19'>ch. 33. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1061"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_23"><span class="notemark">u</span> 32.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_19'>ver. 19</a>. Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM14_5'>Rom. 14. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1062"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 32.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_19'>1 Cor. 7. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1063"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_24"><span class="notemark">y</span> 32.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_1'>ch. 35. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1064"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR32_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>shall not be hurt</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1065"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 33.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_21'>Prov. 12. 21</a>. See <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_13'>1 Pet. 3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1066"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 33.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_9'>2 Pet. 2. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1067"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 33.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_15'>ch. 32. 15</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK20_20'>Luke 20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1068"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 33.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_5'>ver. 5</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_20'>Isai 57. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1069"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as the asking of Urim</span>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_21'>Num. 27. 21</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_10'>ch. 45. 10</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_30'>Ex. 28. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1070"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>bowels</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_12'>ch. 19. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_14'>21. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_21'>51. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1071"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 33.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_5'>ver. 5</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_20'>Isai 57. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1072"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 33.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_5'>ver. 5</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_20'>Isai 57. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1073"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 33.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_11'>ver. 11</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_6'>ch. 36. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_27'>38. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_5'>40. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1074"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 33.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_3'>Gen. 2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1075"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ordained for the number of days</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1076"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 33.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>Gen. 1. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1077"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_11"><span class="notemark">e</span> 33.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_11'>ver. 11</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_6'>ch. 36. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_27'>38. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_5'>40. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1078"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>standings</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1079"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_13"><span class="notemark">h</span> 33.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_20'>Rom. 9. 20</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1080"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_15"><span class="notemark">i</span> 33.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_24'>ch. 42. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1081"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_16"><span class="notemark">k</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_8'>1 Cor. 15. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1082"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_16"><span class="notemark">l</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E212_42'>2 Esdr. 12. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1083"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>gleaneth</span>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_13'>Isai. 24. 13</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1084"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 33.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_2'>Isai. 5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1085"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 33.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_34'>ch. 24. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1086"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 33.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_22'>ch. 32. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1087"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Sell not</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1088"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>look to their hands</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1089"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Of servants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1090"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_25"><span class="notemark">p</span> 33.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_13'>ch. 30. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1091"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_26"><span class="notemark">q</span> 33.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_5'>ch 42. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1092"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_29"><span class="notemark">r</span> 33.29</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_19'>ch. 32. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1093"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_30"><span class="notemark">s</span> 33.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_20'>ch. 7. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1094"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in blood</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1095"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_31"><span class="notemark">r</span> 33.31</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_19'>ch. 32. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1096"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Of dreams.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1097"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>hath his mind upon</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_15'>ver. 15</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1098"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 34.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_19'>Prov. 27. 19</a>. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_3'>Eccles. 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1099"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 34.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_4'>Job 14. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 34.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU12_6'>Num. 12. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 34.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>Wisd. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Regard them not</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 34.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_26'>Lev. 19. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 34.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_20'>ch. 36. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 34.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_12'>ch. 21. 12</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_12"><span class="notemark">h</span> 34.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_26'>Prov. 14. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 34.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS71_5'>Ps. 71. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_15"><span class="notemark">j</span> 34.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_2'>ver. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_16"><span class="notemark">k</span> 34.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_18'>Ps. 33. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_16"><span class="notemark">l</span> 34.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS61_2'>Ps. 61. 2–4</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_1'>91. 1–4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 34.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_27'>ch. 14. 27</a>. Comp. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS1_7'>Cant. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 34.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_27'>Prov. 21. 27</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_8'>Isai. 61. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the mockeries</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 34.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_8'>Prov. 15. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_19"><span class="notemark">p</span> 34.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_22'>1 Sam. 15. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 34.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_3'>2 Sam. 12. 3</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_4'>4</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_12'>ch. 35. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_22"><span class="notemark">r</span> 34.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_13'>Lev. 19. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_20'>ch. 7. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_24"><span class="notemark">s</span> 34.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_6'>Baruch 6. 6</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_14'>Song 14</a>. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_5'>Susanna 5</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_29'>Luke 2. 29</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC4_24'>Acts 4. 24</a> in the Gk. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_1'>ch. 36. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_25"><span class="notemark">t</span> 34.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU19_11'>Numb. 19. 11</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU19_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_26"><span class="notemark">u</span> 34.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_3'>Isai. 58. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR34_26"><span class="notemark">x</span> 34.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_45'>Matt. 12. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 35.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_22'>1 Sam. 15. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_3'>Jer. 7. 3</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_5'>5–7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 35.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_24'>ch. 32. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 35.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV3_1'>Lev. 3. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_2'>ch. 47. 2</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_56'>1 Macc. 4. 56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 35.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_1'>Lev. 2. 1</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_11'>ch. 38. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_2"><span class="notemark">e</span> 35.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R229_31'>2 Chr. 29. 31</a>. &amp; <a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_16'>33. 16</a> in the Gk. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_56'>1 Macc. 4. 56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 35.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_15'>Exod. 23. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 35.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_18'>Ex. 29. 18</a>, &amp;c. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_11'>ch. 38. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_15'>50. 15</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_14'>ch. 39. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 35.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_9'>ch. 39. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 35.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_10'>ver. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_8"><span class="notemark">j</span> 35.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_49'>1 Macc. 3. 49</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_9'>Prov. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 35.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C29_7'>2 Cor. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>set apart</span>. Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_23'>Ex. 19. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 35.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_49'>1 Macc. 3. 49</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_30'>Lev. 27. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 35.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 35.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_7'>Tobit 4. 7</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 35.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_10'>ver. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 35.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_17'>Prov. 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 35.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Diminish nothing of thy offerings</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 35.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV22_20'>Lev. 22. 20–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 35.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_20'>ch. 34. 20</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_12"><span class="notemark">r</span> 35.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS75_7'>Ps. 75. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_12"><span class="notemark">s</span> 35.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_39'>1 Esdr. 4. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_13"><span class="notemark">s</span> 35.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_39'>1 Esdr. 4. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 35.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_22'>Exod. 22. 22</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 35.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_22'>Exod. 22. 22</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 35.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_22'>Exod. 22. 22</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 35.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_23'>Ex. 2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_17"><span class="notemark">v</span> 35.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_26'>Gen. 32. 26</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK18_7'>Luke 18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_18"><span class="notemark">w</span> 35.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_9'>2 Pet. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 35.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_11'>ch. 18. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or. <span class='add'>cruel oppressors</span>. See <a href='1TI.xhtml#T11_13'>1 Tim. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 35.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_27'>Matt. 16. 27</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM2_6'>Rom. 2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 35.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>fair</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_1'>ch. 20. 1</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR35_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 35.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_6'>Ps. 72. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 36.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_17'>ch. 35. 17</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 36.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_6'>Ps. 79. 6</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_25'>Jer. 10. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>upon</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 36.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_41'>Ezek. 20. 41</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_9'>Matt. 6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 36.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_23'>Ezek. 38. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 36.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_23'>Ezek. 38. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 36.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_23'>Ezek. 38. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 36.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_24'>Josh. 4. 24</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_8'>ch. 33. 8</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_11'>11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 36.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_24'>Josh. 4. 24</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_7"><span class="notemark">b</span> 36.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS79_6'>Ps. 79. 6</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_25'>Jer. 10. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 36.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_35'>Deut. 32. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>oath</span>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_22'>Wisd. 18. 22</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_21'>ch. 44. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 36.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_18'>Isai. 24. 18</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_44'>Jer. 48. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 36.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_5'>Ps. 110. 5</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 36.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_47'>Ps. 106. 47</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_10'>ch. 48. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 36.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_13'>ch. 4. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_26'>37. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_23'>39. 23</a>. Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_21'>ch. 44. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 36.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_19'>Dan. 9. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 36.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_15'>Baruch 2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 36.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_58'>2 Esdr. 6. 58</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_13"><span class="notemark">p</span> 36.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_11'>ch. 24. 11</a> marg. See Tobit <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_9'>13. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 36.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_41'>2 Chr. 6. 41</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS132_14'>Ps. 132. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>that</span> it <span class='add'>may magnify thine oracles</span>. Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_2'>Rom. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>prophecies</span>. Prol. 2 marg. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_1'>ch. 39. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_3'>44. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 36.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_8'>ch. 51. 8</a>. So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_31'>Isai. 40. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>suppliants</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 36.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_23'>Numb. 6. 23–27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_17"><span class="notemark">e</span> 36.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_24'>Josh. 4. 24</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 36.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K18_60'>1 Kings 8. 60</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 36.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1TI.xhtml#T11_17'>1 Tim. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_18"><span class="notemark">v</span> 36.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_19"><span class="notemark">w</span> 36.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_11'>Job 12. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_3'>34. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_20"><span class="notemark">x</span> 36.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_9'>ch. 34. 9</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_21"><span class="notemark">v</span> 36.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_22"><span class="notemark">y</span> 36.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_18'>1 Esdr. 4. 18–25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 36.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_24'>ver. 24</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_12'>ch. 37. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>common</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to thrive</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_24"><span class="notemark">a</span> 36.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_18'>Gen. 2. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_24"><span class="notemark">z</span> 36.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_24'>ver. 24</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_12'>ch. 37. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_25"><span class="notemark">b</span> 36.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_24'>ch. 28. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_26"><span class="notemark">c</span> 36.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_15'>Baruch 6. 15</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_18'>18</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_57'>57</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_40'>John 18. 40</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_55'>Matt. 26. 55</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 36.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_9'>ch. 27. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_4"><span class="notemark">a</span> 37.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_10'>ch. 6. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in presence of the enemy</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_6"><span class="notemark">b</span> 37.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_13'>ch. 3. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>what use</span> there is <span class='add'>of him</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_8"><span class="notemark">c</span> 37.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_3'>Joel 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_11"><span class="notemark">d</span> 37.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_6'>ch. 26. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_11"><span class="notemark">e</span> 37.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_29'>ch. 26. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 37.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_1'>ch. 5. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_12"><span class="notemark">g</span> 37.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_23'>ch. 36. 23</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_24'>24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_12"><span class="notemark">h</span> 37.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_34'>ch. 7. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_14"><span class="notemark">i</span> 37.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_16'>Prov. 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 37.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S218_24'>2 Sam. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_18"><span class="notemark">l</span> 37.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 37.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM3_2'>James 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_19"><span class="notemark">n</span> 37.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_12'>ch. 21. 12</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 37.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C19_27'>1 Cor. 9. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_19"><span class="notemark">p</span> 37.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>wisdom</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 37.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_24"><span class="notemark">q</span> 37.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_28'>ch. 11. 28</a>. So <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_48'>Luke 1. 48</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_26"><span class="notemark">r</span> 37.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_35'>Prov. 3. 35</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_13'>ch. 4. 13</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_11'>ch. 36. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>credit</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_26"><span class="notemark">s</span> 37.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_2'>ch. 38. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_28"><span class="notemark">t</span> 37.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CO.xhtml#C16_12'>1 Cor. 6. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_29"><span class="notemark">u</span> 37.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_17'>ch. 31. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>variety of meats</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_30"><span class="notemark">x</span> 37.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_20'>ch. 31. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR37_30"><span class="notemark">x</span> 37.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_20'>ch. 31. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 38.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC28_10'>Acts 28. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_1"><span class="notemark">l</span> 38.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 38.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a gift</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 38.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_26'>ch. 37. 26</a>, not as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_1'>ver. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 38.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_25'>Ex. 15. 25</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_23'>2 Esdr. 1. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 38.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_39'>John 19. 39</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 38.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 38.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS38_2'>Isai. 38. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 38.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_16'>Isai. 1. 16</a>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_3'>Ps. 103. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 38.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS51_10'>Ps. 51. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 38.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_2'>ch. 35. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 38.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_2'>ch. 35. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>as a dead man</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_9'>ch. 44. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG14_11'>Esther 14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 38.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_22'>ch. 13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_12"><span class="notemark">b</span> 38.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 38.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_1'>ver. 1</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 38.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_26'>ch. 43. 26</a> (Gk).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_14"><span class="notemark">f</span> 38.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_14'>ver. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>curing</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_2'>ver. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 38.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_14'>John 5. 14</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C111_30'>1 Cor. 11. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 38.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_11'>ch. 22. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H14_13'>1 Thess. 4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 38.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_23'>ch. 30. 23</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C27_10'>2 Cor. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 38.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_25'>Prov. 12. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_19"><span class="notemark">r</span> 38.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_20"><span class="notemark">s</span> 38.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_36'>ch. 7. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the sentence upon him</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_23"><span class="notemark">t</span> 38.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_20'>2 Sam. 12. 20–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 38.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_5'>ch. 10. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_25"><span class="notemark">v</span> 38.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_6'>ch. 22. 6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>of the breed of bullocks?</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_27"><span class="notemark">w</span> 38.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_1'>Wisd. 13. 1</a> (English).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_27"><span class="notemark">x</span> 38.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_8'>ch. 33. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_27"><span class="notemark">y</span> 38.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_27"><span class="notemark">y</span> 38.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_28"><span class="notemark">z</span> 38.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_12'>Isai. 44. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 38.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 38.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_28"><span class="notemark">a</span> 38.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_10'>ch. 47. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_29"><span class="notemark">b</span> 38.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_3'>Jer. 18. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>tempereth</span> it <span class='add'>with</span> his <span class='add'>feet</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_30"><span class="notemark">y</span> 38.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_30"><span class="notemark">y</span> 38.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_30'>30</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_33"><span class="notemark">c</span> 38.33</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_2'>ch. 39. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 39.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_3'>ch. 44. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_2"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 39.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_33'>ch. 38. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 39.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_17'>ch. 47. 17</a> (Gk.). <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_25'>John 16. 25</a> marg. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_1'>Prov. 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 39.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_15'>ch. 47. 15</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 39.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_1'>ch. 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 39.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_14'>ch. 32. 14</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_15'>15</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_12'>ch. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 39.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_5'>James 1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 39.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_14'>ch. 32. 14</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_15'>15</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_12'>ch. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 39.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_27'>ch. 50. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 39.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_24'>ch. 1. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 39.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_7'>ch. 35. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_13'>44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 39.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_7'>ch. 35. 7</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_13'>44. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_10"><span class="notemark">j</span> 39.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_15'>ch. 44. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_10"><span class="notemark">j</span> 39.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_15'>ch. 44. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>gain unto it</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 39.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_32'>ver. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 39.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_14'>ch. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>rivers of water</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_14"><span class="notemark">m</span> 39.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_6'>ch. 35. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 39.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_15'>ch. 24. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 39.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_8'>ch. 50. 8</a>. See <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_2'>Cant. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 39.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_45'>1 Macc. 3. 45</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_54'>4. 54</a>. &amp; <a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_51'>13. 51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 39.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_31'>Gen. 1. 31</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_33'>ver. 33</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_37'>Mark 7. 37</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T14_4'>1 Tim. 4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_16"><span class="notemark">r</span> 39.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_19'>Numb. 23. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 39.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_20'>Rom. 9. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 39.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_7'>Ps. 33. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_18"><span class="notemark">u</span> 39.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_3'>Ps. 115. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 39.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_1'>Isai. 59. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 39.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_13'>Heb. 4. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 39.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG13_18'>Judg. 13. 18</a> marg. &amp; Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_22"><span class="notemark">a</span> 39.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_13'>ch. 32. 13</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_7'>Isai. 34. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_24"><span class="notemark">b</span> 39.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS14_9'>Hos. 14. 9</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_25"><span class="notemark">c</span> 39.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_10'>ch. 40. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 39.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_21'>ch. 29. 21</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 39.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_21'>ch. 29. 21</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 39.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_21'>ch. 29. 21</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_26"><span class="notemark">e</span> 39.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_11'>Gen. 49. 11</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_14'>Deut. 32. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_15'>ch. 50. 15</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M16_34'>1 Macc. 6. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 39.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_21'>ch. 29. 21</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_3'>ch. 11. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_27"><span class="notemark">f</span> 39.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_28'>Rom. 8. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_29"><span class="notemark">k</span> 39.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_35'>Job 38. 35</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_8'>Ps. 148. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_29"><span class="notemark">k</span> 39.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_35'>Job 38. 35</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_8'>Ps. 148. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 39.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_9'>ch. 40. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 39.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_9'>ch. 40. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_30"><span class="notemark">h</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_24'>Deut. 32. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_5'>Wisd. 16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_5'>Wisd. 16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_30"><span class="notemark">i</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_5'>Wisd. 16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>vipers</span>. So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC28_3'>Acts 28. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_30"><span class="notemark">g</span> 39.30</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_9'>ch. 40. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_31"><span class="notemark">k</span> 39.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_35'>Job 38. 35</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS148_8'>Ps. 148. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_32"><span class="notemark">l</span> 39.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR39_33"><span class="notemark">m</span> 39.33</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 40.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_3'>Eccles. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 40.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_11'>ver. 11</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_10'>ch. 41. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 40.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_26'>Luke 21. 26</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 40.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_26'>Luke 21. 26</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 40.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_5'>Ex. 11. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 40.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_32'>ch. 17. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_5'>Ex. 11. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_4'>Ex. 26. 4</a>, &amp;c. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_10'>ch. 45. 10</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_23'>1 Macc. 4. 23</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_17'>Rev. 9. 17</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>To the porter</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 40.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_14'>Job 4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 40.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_7'>Gen. 6. 7</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_8'>Ps. 135. 8</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 40.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_3'>ch. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_29'>ch. 39. 29</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_29'>ch. 39. 29</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_29'>ch. 39. 29</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 40.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_3'>Wisd. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_25'>ch. 39. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 40.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_13'>Gen. 6. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_11'>7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_11"><span class="notemark">b</span> 40.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_11'>ver. 11</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_10'>ch. 41. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_11"><span class="notemark">p</span> 40.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC1_7'>Eccles. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>bribes</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 40.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB6_15'>Job 6. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 40.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_25'>Prov. 10. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 40.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT15_8'>Deut. 15. 8</a>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_28'>Ps. 104. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_16'>145. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 40.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_16'>Job 18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 40.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_11'>Job 8. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_16'>18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_16"><span class="notemark">v</span> 40.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_2'>Gen. 41. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_16"><span class="notemark">w</span> 40.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_30'>Matt. 6. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a garden that is blessed</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 40.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP4_11'>Phil. 4. 11</a>, <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP4_12'>12</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_6'>1 Tim. 6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_18"><span class="notemark">y</span> 40.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_14'>Wisd. 7. 14</a>? or <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_17'>ver. 17</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 40.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_27'>ch. 31. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 40.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E210_22'>2 Esdr. 10 22</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_18'>Wisd. 19. 18</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS71_22'>Ps. 71. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_24"><span class="notemark">b</span> 40.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_13'>ch. 29 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_26"><span class="notemark">c</span> 40.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_15'>Prov. 10. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_26"><span class="notemark">d</span> 40.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_18'>ch. 19. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 40.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a garden that is blessed</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_27"><span class="notemark">e</span> 40.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS4_5'>Isai. 4. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_28"><span class="notemark">f</span> 40.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_3'>Luke 16. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR40_29"><span class="notemark">g</span> 40.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_20'>Acts 15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 41.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_11'>Wisd. 16. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_2"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 41.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_8'>ch. 42. 8</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to whom every</span> thing <span class='add'>is troublesome</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 41.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB3_18'>Heb. 3. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 41.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_14'>ch. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 41.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS21_10'>Ps. 21. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 41.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_6'>Wisd. 4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 41.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_1'>ch. 40. 1</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 41.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS109_13'>Ps. 109. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_12"><span class="notemark">h</span> 41.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_1'>Prov. 22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 41.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_2'>ch. 17. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 41.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_30'>ch. 20. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 41.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_31'>ch. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 41.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_31'>ch. 20. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_16"><span class="notemark">m</span> 41.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_20'>ch. 4. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 41.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_21'>ch. 4. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_19"><span class="notemark">p</span> 41.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_7'>ch. 42. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 41.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_2'>ch. 42. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_28'>Matt. 5. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 41.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_9'>ch. 9. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_22"><span class="notemark">t</span> 41.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_20'>ch. 22. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_22"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 41.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_15'>ch. 18. 15</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_18'>18</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_15'>20. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 41.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_7'>ch. 19. 7</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_14'>14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_23"><span class="notemark">o</span> 41.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1JN.xhtml#1JN2_28'>1 John 2. 28</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 41.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_22'>ch. 22. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_24"><span class="notemark">z</span> 41.24</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_18'>ch. 3. 18</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 42.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_21'>ch. 4. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_22'>20. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 42.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_17'>Deut. 10. 17</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_27'>ch. 4. 27</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_22'>20. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 42.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_19'>ch. 41. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Of</span> thy <span class='add'>partners’ speech</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>companions</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of the giving</span>. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP4_15'>Phil. 4. 15</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_7'>ver. 7</a>. (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 42.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_1'>Prov. 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 42.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_1'>ch. 19. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>without profit</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_1'>ch. 27. 1</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 42.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_8'>ver. 8</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_1'>ch. 30. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 42.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_26'>ch. 33. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 42.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_19'>ch. 41. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>dealest for</span>. Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_8"><span class="notemark">i</span> 42.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Supplied from <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_1'>ver. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>rebuke</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_5'>ver. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 42.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_2'>ch. 41. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>that is accused of fornication</span>. Comp. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_61'>Susanna 61</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_62'>62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 42.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_24'>ch. 7. 24</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 42.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1CO.xhtml#C17_36'>1 Cor. 7. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 42.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_4'>ch. 22. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 42.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_10'>ch. 26. 10</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 42.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_21'>ch. 25. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 42.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_24'>ch. 25. 24</a>. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_6'>Gen. 3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>wickedness</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_17'>ch. 25. 17</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 42.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_21'>Prov. 7. 21</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 42.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E26_38'>2 Esdr. 6. 38</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 42.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_4'>ch. 18. 4</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_27'>ch. 43. 27</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 42.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_18"><span class="notemark">v</span> 42.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_12'>ch. 21. 12</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the Highest</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_18"><span class="notemark">w</span> 42.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_6'>ch. 43. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_19"><span class="notemark">x</span> 42.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_10'>Isai. 46. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_20"><span class="notemark">y</span> 42.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB42_2'>Job 42. 2</a>. So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_15'>Isai. 29. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_21"><span class="notemark">z</span> 42.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_27'>ch. 16. 27</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_8'>ch. 17. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_21"><span class="notemark">z</span> 42.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_27'>ch. 16. 27</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_8'>ch. 17. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 42.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_6'>ch. 18. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_21"><span class="notemark">b</span> 42.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_13'>Isai. 40. 13</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_34'>Rom. 11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_23"><span class="notemark">c</span> 42.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_3'>ch. 18. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR42_24"><span class="notemark">d</span> 42.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_14'>ch. 33. 14</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>vessel</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_8'>ver. 8</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_8'>ch. 45. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>he stayed</span> his <span class='add'>course</span>. Comp. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_13'>Josh. 10. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_5"><span class="notemark">a</span> 43.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_13'>ver. 13</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS19_5'>Ps. 19. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_6"><span class="notemark">b</span> 43.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_14'>Gen. 1. 14</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_16'>16</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_19'>Ps. 104. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 43.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_18'>ch. 42. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 43.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_2'>Ex 12. 2</a>. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_4'>Lev. 23. 4</a>, &amp;c</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 43.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_22'>ch. 6. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 43.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT7_7'>Judith 7. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_9"><span class="notemark">g</span> 43.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_9'>Matt. 21. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 43.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_34'>Baruch 3. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 43.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_13'>Gen. 9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 43.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_7'>ch. 50. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 43.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_12'>Isai. 40. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 43.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_16'>Ps. 147. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_13"><span class="notemark">n</span> 43.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_5'>ver. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_14"><span class="notemark">o</span> 43.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_12'>Deut. 28. 12</a>. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_22'>Job 38. 22</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_7'>Ps. 135. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 43.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_22'>Wisd. 5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 43.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_32'>Ps. 104. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 43.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS46_6'>Ps. 46. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to groan as a woman in her travail</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_19'>ch. 48. 19</a>. See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_24'>Jer. 6. 24</a>. Comp. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_8'>Mark 13. 8</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 43.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_16'>Ps. 147. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 43.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_9'>Wisd. 16. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_34'>Ps. 105. 34</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 43.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_16'>Ps. 147. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>it is</span> as <span class='add'>the point of sharp stakes</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_20"><span class="notemark">t</span> 43.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_9'>Gen. 1. 9</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 43.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>upon the heat</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_24"><span class="notemark">u</span> 43.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_23'>Ps. 107. 23–27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_24"><span class="notemark">v</span> 43.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M113_29'>1 Macc. 13. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_25"><span class="notemark">w</span> 43.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_25'>Ps. 104. 25</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS104_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_25"><span class="notemark">x</span> 43.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK5_26'>Luke 5. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_26"><span class="notemark">y</span> 43.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_13'>ch. 38. 13</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_26"><span class="notemark">z</span> 43.26</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='COL.xhtml#CL1_17'>Col. 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_27"><span class="notemark">a</span> 43.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_17'>ch. 42. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_28"><span class="notemark">a</span> 43.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_17'>ch. 42. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_29"><span class="notemark">b</span> 43.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS96_4'>Ps. 96. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_5'>147. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_31"><span class="notemark">c</span> 43.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_2'>Ps. 106. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_31"><span class="notemark">d</span> 43.31</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_18'>John 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR43_32"><span class="notemark">e</span> 43.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_21'>ch. 16. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.1</a>
 <span class="ft">The praise of the fathers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 44.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_1'>ch. 39. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_5"><span class="notemark">b</span> 44.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_8'>ch. 47. 8–10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ditties</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 44.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_9"><span class="notemark">d</span> 44.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_22'>Gen. 7. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 44.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_2'>Wisd. 2. 2</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_11'>ch. 38. 11</a>. (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 44.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 44.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_22'>Prov. 13. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 44.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 44.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS112_2'>Ps. 112. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 44.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>after them</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 44.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_9'>ch. 39. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 44.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_10'>ch. 39. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 44.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_10'>ch. 39. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_16"><span class="notemark">l</span> 44.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_24'>Gen. 5. 24</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_14'>ch. 49. 14</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_5'>Heb. 11. 5</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_10'>Wisd. 4. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 44.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_9'>Gen. 6. 9</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_1'>7. 1</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_7'>Heb. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 44.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_11'>Gen. 9. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 44.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_2'>Gen. 12. 2</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_3'>3</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_5'>15. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_4'>17. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_20"><span class="notemark">h</span> 44.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_20'>ver. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_20"><span class="notemark">p</span> 44.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_10'>Gen. 17. 10</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN17_11'>11</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN21_4'>21. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 44.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_1'>Gen. 22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 44.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_16'>Gen. 22. 16–18</a>. <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL3_8'>Gal. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 44.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_13'>ch. 4. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_11'>36. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_26'>37. 26</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_22'>45. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>46. 1</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 44.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_18'>Gen. 15. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 44.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_3'>Gen. 26. 3–5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 44.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_28'>Gen. 27. 28</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN27_29'>29</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_14'>28. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 44.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_13'>Gen. 28. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR44_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 44.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN49_28'>Gen. 49. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 45.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_22'>ch. 47. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_1"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 45.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_24'>ch. 41. 24</a>. So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_3'>Ex. 11. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 45.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_13'>ch. 46. 13</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR3_34'>Baruch 3. 36</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_12'>Song 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_1"><span class="notemark">bb</span> 45.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_11'>ch. 46. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_10'>49. 10</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_7'>1 Macc. 3. 7</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_7'>Prov. 10. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 45.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_12'>Ex. 7. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_18'>8. 18</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 45.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_0'>ch. 7</a>–<a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_0'>ch. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 45.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_3'>Ex. 19. 3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_7'>7</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_1'>Deut. 6. 1</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_3"><span class="notemark">f</span> 45.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_6'>Ex. 34. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_4"><span class="notemark">ff</span> 45.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB3_5'>Heb. 3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 45.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU12_3'>Num. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 45.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_18'>Ex. 24. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 45.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_3'>Ex. 19. 3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_7'>7</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_1'>Deut. 6. 1</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 45.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_14'>Ex. 4. 14</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_6"><span class="notemark">j</span> 45.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_16'>Ex. 6. 16</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 45.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_1'>Ex. 28. 1</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>he blessed</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 45.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_12'>ver. 12</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>vessels</span>, or, <span class='add'>instruments</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_2'>ch. 43. 2</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_8'>8</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_5'>Deut. 22. 5</a> (Heb. &amp; Gk.). See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C24_7'>2 Cor. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 45.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_42'>Ex. 28. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 45.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_4'>Ex. 28. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 45.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_4'>Ex. 28. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_9"><span class="notemark">o</span> 45.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_33'>Ex. 28. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 45.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_35'>Ex. 28. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_9"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 45.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_16'>ch. 50. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_10"><span class="notemark">q</span> 45.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_49'>1 Macc. 3. 49</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_24'>Wisd. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 45.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_23'>1 Macc. 4. 23</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_4'>ch. 40. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 45.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M14_23'>1 Macc. 4. 23</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_4'>ch. 40. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_10"><span class="notemark">s</span> 45.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_15'>Ex. 28. 15</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_10"><span class="notemark">s</span> 45.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_15'>Ex. 28. 15</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_10"><span class="notemark">t</span> 45.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_3'>ch. 33. 3</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_11"><span class="notemark">s</span> 45.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_15'>Ex. 28. 15</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_11"><span class="notemark">u</span> 45.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_17'>Ex. 28. 17–21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_12"><span class="notemark">q</span> 45.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_49'>1 Macc. 3. 49</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_24'>Wisd. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_12"><span class="notemark">x</span> 45.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_36'>Ex. 28. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_12"><span class="notemark">y</span> 45.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT4_15'>Judith 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 45.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_12'>ver. 12</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_2'>ch. 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_13"><span class="notemark">z</span> 45.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_4'>Ex. 28. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_14"><span class="notemark">a</span> 45.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_3'>Num. 28. 3</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU28_4'>4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_15"><span class="notemark">b</span> 45.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV8_1'>Lev. 8. 1–30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_15"><span class="notemark">c</span> 45.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_41'>Ex. 28. 41</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_15"><span class="notemark">d</span> 45.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT11_21'>Deut. 11. 21</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS89_29'>Ps. 89. 29</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_11'>Baruch 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_15"><span class="notemark">e</span> 45.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_23'>Num. 6. 23–27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_16"><span class="notemark">f</span> 45.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU17_5'>Num. 17. 5</a>. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_28'>1 Sam. 2. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_16"><span class="notemark">g</span> 45.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_19'>ch. 30. 19</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_16"><span class="notemark">h</span> 45.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT16_16'>Judith 16. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_17"><span class="notemark">i</span> 45.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_9'>Deut. 17. 9–11</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_17'>19. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT21_5'>21. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_10'>33. 10</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_26'>ver. 26</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_11'>Lev. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_18"><span class="notemark">k</span> 45.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_1'>Num. 16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_18"><span class="notemark">l</span> 45.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GAL.xhtml#GL4_17'>Gal. 4. 17</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_19"><span class="notemark">m</span> 45.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_23'>Num. 16. 23–35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 45.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU17_8'>Num. 17. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 45.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_12'>Num. 18. 12</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 45.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CO.xhtml#C19_13'>1 Cor. 9. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 45.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_20'>Num. 18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_22"><span class="notemark">qq</span> 45.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_21'>ch. 44. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 45.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU18_20'>Num. 18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 45.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_11'>Num. 25. 11–13</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>1 Macc. 2. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 45.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_4'>Num. 25. 4–9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_24"><span class="notemark">r</span> 45.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_11'>Num. 25. 11–13</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>1 Macc. 2. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_24"><span class="notemark">r</span> 45.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU25_11'>Num. 25. 11–13</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_54'>1 Macc. 2. 54</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_25"><span class="notemark">t</span> 45.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>2 Sam. 7. 12–16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR45_26"><span class="notemark">i</span> 45.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_9'>Deut. 17. 9–11</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_17'>19. 17</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT21_5'>21. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_10'>33. 10</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_26'>ver. 26</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_11'>Lev. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 46.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU27_18'>Num. 27. 18</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_9'>Deut. 34. 9</a>. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_2'>Josh. 1. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_7'>12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 46.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_1'>ch. 39. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 46.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_22'>ch. 6. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_8'>43. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_1"><span class="notemark">d</span> 46.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_22'>ch. 47. 22</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_13'>49. 13</a>. See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_21'>Esther 16. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_1"><span class="notemark">e</span> 46.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_21'>ch. 44. 21</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_6'>Josh. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_2"><span class="notemark">f</span> 46.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Josh. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_0'>ch. 6</a>–<a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_0'>ch. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_3"><span class="notemark">g</span> 46.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 46.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_12'>Josh. 10. 12–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 46.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_16'>16</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_15'>1 Tim. 6. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_24'>2 Macc. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_6"><span class="notemark">j</span> 46.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_11'>Josh. 10. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 46.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_16'>16</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_15'>1 Tim. 6. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_24'>2 Macc. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 46.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_6'>Num. 14. 6–9</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_55'>1 Macc. 2. 55</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_56'>56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 46.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU1_46'>Num. 1. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 46.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_38'>Num. 14. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU26_65'>26. 65</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_35'>Deut. 1. 35</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_36'>36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 46.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_20'>Baruch 1. 20</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_8'>Ex. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_9"><span class="notemark">o</span> 46.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_6'>Josh. 14. 6–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 46.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_6'>Josh. 14. 6–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_10"><span class="notemark">p</span> 46.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU14_24'>Num. 14. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_11"><span class="notemark">q</span> 46.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_17'>Judg. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_11"><span class="notemark">r</span> 46.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>ch. 45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_12"><span class="notemark">s</span> 46.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_10'>ch. 49. 10</a>. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_14'>Isai. 66. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_12"><span class="notemark">t</span> 46.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K221_18'>2 Kin. 21. 18</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K221_26'>26</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_41'>John 19. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_13"><span class="notemark">u</span> 46.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>ch. 45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_13"><span class="notemark">v</span> 46.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S110_1'>1 Sam. 10. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_13'>16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_15"><span class="notemark">w</span> 46.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S13_19'>1 Sam. 3. 19</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S13_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_16"><span class="notemark">x</span> 46.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS99_6'>Ps. 99. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_16"><span class="notemark">i</span> 46.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_6'>ver. 6</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_16'>16</a>. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_15'>1 Tim. 6. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_24'>2 Macc. 3. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_16"><span class="notemark">y</span> 46.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_7'>1 Sam. 7. 7</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_16"><span class="notemark">z</span> 46.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_9'>1 Sam. 7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_17"><span class="notemark">a</span> 46.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_10'>1 Sam. 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_18"><span class="notemark">b</span> 46.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG10_12'>Judg. 10. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_18"><span class="notemark">c</span> 46.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_11'>1 Sam. 7. 11</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_19"><span class="notemark">d</span> 46.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_13'>ch. 48. 13</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN11_11'>John 11. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_19"><span class="notemark">e</span> 46.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S112_3'>1 Sam. 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_19"><span class="notemark">f</span> 46.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S112_5'>1 Sam. 12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_20"><span class="notemark">g</span> 46.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_18'>1 Sam. 28. 18</a>, <a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 47.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_1'>2 Sam. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 47.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV3_3'>Lev. 3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 47.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_7'>1 Sam. 16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>He smote lions</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 47.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_34'>1 Sam. 17. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 47.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_34'>1 Sam. 17. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 47.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_49'>1 Sam. 17. 49–51</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 47.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_11'>ver. 11</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_5'>ch. 49. 5</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_48'>1 Macc. 2. 48</a> marg. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_1'>1 Sam. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 47.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1SA.xhtml#S118_7'>1 Sam. 18. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 47.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S25_7'>2 Sam. 5. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>contemned</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_1'>ch. 19. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 47.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S28_1'>2 Sam. 8. 1</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_26'>ch. 50. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 47.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DAN.xhtml#DN8_8'>Dan. 8. 8</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 47.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2SA.xhtml#S223_1'>2 Sam. 23. 1</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_5'>ch. 44. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 47.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R116_4'>1 Chr. 16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1625"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>perfectly</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_28'>ch. 38. 28</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_11'>ch. 50. 11</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1626"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 47.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_13'>2 Sam. 12. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1627"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_11"><span class="notemark">f</span> 47.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_11'>ver. 11</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_5'>ch. 49. 5</a>. Comp. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_48'>1 Macc. 2. 48</a> marg. See <a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_1'>1 Sam. 2. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1628"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 47.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>2 Sam. 7. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1629"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of a kingdom</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1630"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 47.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_21'>1 Kin. 4. 21–24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1631"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 47.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_25'>1 Kin. 4. 25</a>. &amp; <a href='1KI.xhtml#K15_4'>5. 4</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K15_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1632"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 47.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_25'>1 Kin. 4. 25</a>. &amp; <a href='1KI.xhtml#K15_4'>5. 4</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K15_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1633"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 47.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_29'>1 Kin. 4. 29</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_30'>30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1634"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 47.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_4'>Prov. 18. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1635"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 47.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_3'>ch. 39. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1636"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 47.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_34'>1 Kin. 4. 34</a>. &amp; <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1637"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 47.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_34'>1 Kin. 4. 34</a>. &amp; <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_1'>10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1638"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_17"><span class="notemark">v</span> 47.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_31'>1 Kin. 4. 31</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_32'>32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1639"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 47.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_3'>ch. 39. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1640"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 47.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_3'>ch. 39. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1641"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_18"><span class="notemark">w</span> 47.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_22'>1 Kin. 10. 22</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K110_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1642"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 47.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_18'>Ezek. 22. 18</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1643"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 47.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_18'>Ezek. 22. 18</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1644"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 47.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_1'>1 Kin. 11. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1645"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1646"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_20"><span class="notemark">z</span> 47.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC7_26'>Eccles. 7. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1647"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_21"><span class="notemark">a</span> 47.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_15'>1 Kin. 12. 15–17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1648"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_22"><span class="notemark">b</span> 47.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_15'>2 Sam. 7. 15</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS89_33'>Ps. 89. 33</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_8'>ch. 36. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_21'>44. 21</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1649"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_22"><span class="notemark">c</span> 47.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>ch. 46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1650"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_22"><span class="notemark">d</span> 47.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>ch. 45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1651"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_23"><span class="notemark">e</span> 47.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_43'>1 Kin. 11. 43</a>. Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC4_16'>Eccles. 4. 16</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1652"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_23"><span class="notemark">f</span> 47.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_10'>1 Kin. 12. 10–14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1653"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_23"><span class="notemark">g</span> 47.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_20'>1 Kin. 12. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1654"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_23"><span class="notemark">h</span> 47.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_28'>1 Kin. 12. 28</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K112_30'>30</a>. See <a href='1KI.xhtml#K114_16'>1 Kin. 14. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1655"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_24"><span class="notemark">i</span> 47.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K217_6'>2 Kin. 17. 6</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K217_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1656"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 48.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_1'>1 Kin. 17. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1657"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 48.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_35'>John 5. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1658"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 48.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_17'>James 5. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1659"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 48.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1660"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 48.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JAS.xhtml#JM5_17'>James 5. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1661"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>made heaven to hold up</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1662"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 48.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K118_38'>1 Kin. 18. 38</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K21_10'>2 Kin. 1. 10</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K21_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1663"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_4"><span class="notemark">dd</span> 48.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_5'>ch. 50. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1664"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 48.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_21'>1 Kin. 17. 21</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K117_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1665"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>grave</span>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS49_15'>Ps. 49. 15</a> marg. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_6'>ch. 51. 6</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1666"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 48.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R221_12'>2 Chr. 21. 12</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R221_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1667"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 48.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K21_16'>2 Kin. 1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1668"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>seat</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1669"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 48.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K21_16'>2 Kin. 1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1670"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 48.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_4'>1 Kin. 19. 4–8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1671"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 48.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E22_33'>2 Esdr. 2. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1672"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 48.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_15'>1 Kin. 19. 15</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1673"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 48.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_15'>1 Kin. 19. 15</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K119_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1674"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.8</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>thee</span>.].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1675"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 48.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K22_11'>2 Kin. 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1676"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>written of</span>. Comp. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML4_5'>Mal. 4. 5</a>, <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML4_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1677"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 48.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Cited from <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML4_6'>Mal. 4. 6</a>. cited also <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_17'>Luke 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1678"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 48.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_11'>ch. 36. 11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1679"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>establish</span>. So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT17_11'>Matt. 17. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1680"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>were adorned with love</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1681"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 48.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K22_11'>2 Kin. 2. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1682"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 48.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K22_15'>2 Kin. 2. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1683"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 48.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K23_14'>2 Kin. 3. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K26_32'>6. 32</a>–<a href='2KI.xhtml#K27_2'>7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1684"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Nothing</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1685"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 48.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K25_25'>2 Kin. 5. 25</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K25_26'>26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1686"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 48.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K213_21'>2 Kin. 13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1687"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_13"><span class="notemark">s</span> 48.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_19'>ch. 46. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1688"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 48.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_11'>2 Kin. 18. 11</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1689"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_15"><span class="notemark">u</span> 48.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_9'>Isai. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1690"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_17"><span class="notemark">v</span> 48.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_1'>2 Kin. 18. 1</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1691"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_17"><span class="notemark">w</span> 48.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R232_5'>2 Chr. 32. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1692"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 48.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_20'>2 Kin. 20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1693"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 48.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_20'>2 Kin. 20. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1694"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_18"><span class="notemark">y</span> 48.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_13'>2 Kin. 18. 13</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_17'>17</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS36_1'>Isai. 36. 1</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS36_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1695"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_19"><span class="notemark">z</span> 48.19</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_17'>ch. 43. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1696"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_20"><span class="notemark">a</span> 48.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_14'>2 Kin. 19. 14–20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1697"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_20"><span class="notemark">b</span> 48.20</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB11_13'>Job 11. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1698"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>hand</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_6'>ch. 49. 6</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_1'>Wisd. 11. 1</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_20'>Baruch 2. 20</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_24'>24</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_28'>28</a> (Gk.). So <a href='2KI.xhtml#K214_25'>2 Kin. 14. 25</a>, &amp;c (Heb. &amp; Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1699"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_21"><span class="notemark">c</span> 48.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_35'>2 Kin. 19. 35</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS37_36'>Isai. 37. 36</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_18'>Tobit 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1700"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_21"><span class="notemark">c</span> 48.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_35'>2 Kin. 19. 35</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS37_36'>Isai. 37. 36</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_18'>Tobit 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1701"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_22"><span class="notemark">d</span> 48.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_3'>2 Kin. 18. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1702"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_22"><span class="notemark">e</span> 48.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_2'>2 Kin. 19. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1703"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_22"><span class="notemark">f</span> 48.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_8'>Isai. 6. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1704"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_23"><span class="notemark">g</span> 48.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_10'>2 Kin. 20. 10</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_11'>11</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS38_8'>Isai. 38. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1705"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR48_24"><span class="notemark">h</span> 48.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_1'>Isai. 40. 1</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1706"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 49.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K222_1'>2 Kin. 22. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_2'>23. 2</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R234_1'>2 Chr. 34. 1</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R234_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1707"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 49.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC10_1'>Eccles. 10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1708"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 49.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_5'>ch. 32. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1709"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>prospered</span>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_3'>ver. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1710"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 49.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_4'>2 Kin. 23. 4–8</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R234_3'>2 Chr. 34. 3–7</a>, <a href='2CH.xhtml#R234_33'>33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1711"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 49.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_3'>2 Kin. 23. 3</a>, <a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1712"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 49.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_17'>2 Chr. 36. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1713"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>horn</span>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS132_17'>Ps. 132. 17</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_5'>ch. 47. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1714"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_9'>2 Kin. 25. 9</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_19'>2 Chr. 36. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1715"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>by the hand of Jeremie</span>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_20'>ch. 48. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1716"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 49.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR34_22'>Jer. 34. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1717"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 49.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR37_21'>Jer. 37. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR38_6'>38. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1718"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 49.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_5'>Jer. 1. 5</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_36'>John 10. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1719"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_7"><span class="notemark">l</span> 49.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_10'>Jer. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1720"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_7"><span class="notemark">l</span> 49.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_10'>Jer. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1721"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 49.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK1_3'>Ezek. 1. 3</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK1_4'>4</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK1_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1722"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 49.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R128_18'>1 Chr. 28. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1723"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_9"><span class="notemark">o</span> 49.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK13_11'>Ezek. 13. 11</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK13_13'>13</a>. &amp; <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_9'>38. 9</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_16'>16</a>, <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1724"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>did good</span> [<span class='add'>unto</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1725"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_10"><span class="notemark">p</span> 49.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_39'>2 Esdr. 1. 39</a>, <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_40'>40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1726"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_10"><span class="notemark">q</span> 49.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_1'>ch. 45. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1727"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 49.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_12'>ch. 46. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1728"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_11"><span class="notemark">s</span> 49.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_19'>1 Chr. 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1729"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_11"><span class="notemark">t</span> 49.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HAG.xhtml#HG2_23'>Hagg. 2. 23</a>. See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_24'>Jer. 22. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1730"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_12"><span class="notemark">u</span> 49.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EZR.xhtml#ER3_2'>Ezra 3. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH12_7'>Neh. 12. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1731"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_13"><span class="notemark">v</span> 49.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_1'>ch. 46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1732"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_13"><span class="notemark">w</span> 49.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NEH.xhtml#NH3_1'>Neh. 3. 1–32</a>. &amp; <a href='NEH.xhtml#NH7_1'>7. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1733"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_14"><span class="notemark">x</span> 49.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_16'>ch. 44. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1734"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_15"><span class="notemark">y</span> 49.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_43'>Gen. 41. 43</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_44'>44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1735"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_15"><span class="notemark">z</span> 49.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN42_6'>Gen. 42. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN45_8'>45. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1736"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_15"><span class="notemark">a</span> 49.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN47_13'>Gen. 47. 13–26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1737"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_15"><span class="notemark">b</span> 49.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN50_25'>Gen. 50. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1738"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_16"><span class="notemark">c</span> 49.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_3'>Gen. 5. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1739"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_16"><span class="notemark">d</span> 49.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_32'>Gen. 5. 32</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN11_10'>11. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1740"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_16"><span class="notemark">e</span> 49.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_28'>Gen. 1. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1741"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[B.C. 310–290]. Not as <a href='1MA.xhtml#M112_7'>1 Macc. 12. 7</a>. <a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_1'>2 Macc. 3. 1</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1742"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 50.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K17_23'>1 Kin. 7. 23</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_13'>2 Kin. 25. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1743"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_5"><span class="notemark">b</span> 50.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_4'>ch. 48. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1744"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>the house of the veil</span>. Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_6'>Ex. 30. 6</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_10'>10</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB9_7'>Heb. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1745"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 50.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_28'>Rev. 2. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1746"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 50.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2SA.xhtml#S223_4'>2 Sam. 23. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1747"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 50.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_11'>ch. 43. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1748"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 50.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_14'>ch. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1749"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 50.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_14'>ch. 39. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1750"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 50.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_10'>Baruch. 1. 10</a> (Gk.) See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_15'>ch. 24. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1751"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 50.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV16_12'>Lev. 16. 12</a>, <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV16_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1752"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 50.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_10'>Baruch. 1. 10</a> (Gk.) See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_15'>ch. 24. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1753"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 50.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_13'>ch. 24. 13</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1754"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_10"><span class="notemark">k</span> 50.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_13'>ch. 24. 13</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_14'>14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1755"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 50.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_21'>1 Macc. 10. 21</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_24'>Wisd. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1756"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 50.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_7'>Ex. 30. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1757"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 50.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1MA.xhtml#M110_21'>1 Macc. 10. 21</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_24'>Wisd. 18. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1758"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 50.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_15'>Judg. 9. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT1_7'>Judith 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1759"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 50.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_14'>ch. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1760"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 50.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1761"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 50.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_26'>ch. 39. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1762"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 50.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_40'>Ex. 29. 40</a>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_41'>41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1763"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 50.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_40'>Ex. 29. 40</a>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_41'>41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1764"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 50.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_6'>ch. 35. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1765"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 50.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_54'>1 Macc. 3. 54</a>. See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_10'>Numb. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1766"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>trumpets beaten forth with the hammer</span>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_2'>Numb. 10. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1767"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 50.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_9'>ch. 45. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1768"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 50.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_54'>1 Macc. 3. 54</a>. See <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU10_10'>Numb. 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1769"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 50.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1770"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_20"><span class="notemark">v</span> 50.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU6_22'>Numb. 6. 22–26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1771"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 50.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_18'>Ps. 72. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1772"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_22"><span class="notemark">x</span> 50.22</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS71_6'>Ps. 71. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1773"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_25"><span class="notemark">y</span> 50.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_2'>ch. 25. 2</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_16'>ch. 23. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1774"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_26"><span class="notemark">z</span> 50.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K116_24'>2 Kin. 16. 24</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN4_9'>John 4. 9</a>. See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_7'>Judg. 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1775"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_26"><span class="notemark">a</span> 50.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_7'>ch. 47. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1776"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_26"><span class="notemark">b</span> 50.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS74_18'>Ps. 74. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1777"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_26"><span class="notemark">c</span> 50.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_6'>Gen. 12. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1778"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_27"><span class="notemark">d</span> 50.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_19'>ch. 1. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_6'>39. 6</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_13'>ch. 10. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_29'>18. 29</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1779"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_28"><span class="notemark">e</span> 50.28</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_3'>Rev. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1780"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_29"><span class="notemark">f</span> 50.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_105'>Ps. 119. 105</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1781"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_29"><span class="notemark">w</span> 50.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_18'>Ps. 72. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1782"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 51.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_47'>Luke 1. 47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1783"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 51.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS120_2'>Ps. 120. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1784"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 51.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_23'>Matt. 7. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1785"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>the gnashing</span> of the teeth. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_12'>Matt. 8. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1786"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 51.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_10'>Ps. 118. 10</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1787"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 51.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_16'>ch. 36. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1788"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 51.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_1'>Ps. 110. 1</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM15_6'>Rom. 15. 6</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1789"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 51.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK22_53'>Luke 22. 53</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1790"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[Or, <span class='add'>because my prayer</span>].</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1791"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>went astray</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_8'>ch. 9. 8</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_28'>Baruch 4. 28</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_8'>Isai. 46. 8</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1792"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_17"><span class="notemark">gg</span> 51.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_52'>Luke 2. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1793"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>I got understanding</span>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_3'>Job 12. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1794"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 51.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>bowels</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_12'>ch. 19. 12</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_14'>ch. 21. 14</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_5'>33. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1795"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_25"><span class="notemark">h</span> 51.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_1'>Isai. 55. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1796"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_26"><span class="notemark">i</span> 51.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_29'>Matt. 11. 29</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_25'>ch. 6. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1797"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_26"><span class="notemark">i</span> 51.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_29'>Matt. 11. 29</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_25'>ch. 6. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1798"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_26"><span class="notemark">k</span> 51.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_14'>Deut. 30. 14</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM10_8'>Rom. 10. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1799"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_27"><span class="notemark">l</span> 51.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_19'>ch. 6. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1800"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_28"><span class="notemark">m</span> 51.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_7'>Prov. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1801"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_28"><span class="notemark">n</span> 51.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_11'>Wisd. 7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1802"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_28"><span class="notemark">n</span> 51.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_11'>Wisd. 7. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1803"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_29"><span class="notemark">o</span> 51.29</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_21'>Ps. 33. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1804"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_30"><span class="notemark">p</span> 51.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_4'>John 9. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1805"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR51_30"><span class="notemark">q</span> 51.30</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_12'>ch. 16. 12</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_14'>14</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS62_12'>Ps. 62. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

