<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Song of Solomon 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Song of Solomon</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_0'>8</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='SS0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Song of Solomon  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="SS1_1">1&#160;</span> The song of songs, which <span class='add'>is</span> Solomon’s. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS1_2">2&#160;</span> Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>for <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>thy love <span class='add'>is</span> better than wine.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_3">3&#160;</span> Because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name <span class='add'>is as</span> ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine: <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the upright love thee.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_5">5&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_6">6&#160;</span> Look not upon me, because I <span class='add'>am</span> black, because the sun hath looked upon me: my mother’s children were angry with me; they made me the keeper of the vineyards; <span class='add'>but</span> mine own vineyard have I not kept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS1_7">7&#160;</span> Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where thou makest <span class='add'>thy flock</span> to rest at noon: for why should I be <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS1_8">8&#160;</span>¶ If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds’ tents.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_9">9&#160;</span> I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh’s chariots.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_10">10&#160;</span> Thy cheeks are comely with rows <span class='add'>of jewels</span>, thy neck with chains <span class='add'>of gold</span>.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_11">11&#160;</span> We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ While the king <span class='add'>sitteth</span> at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_13">13&#160;</span> A bundle of myrrh <span class='add'>is</span> my wellbeloved unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_14">14&#160;</span> My beloved <span class='add'>is</span> unto me <span class='add'>as</span> a cluster of <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>camphire in the vineyards of En-gedi.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> fair, <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>my love; behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> fair; thou <span class='add'>hast</span> doves’ eyes.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_16">16&#160;</span>Behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed <span class='add'>is</span> green.
<span class="verse" id="SS1_17">17&#160;</span> The beams of our house <span class='add'>are</span> cedar, <span class='add'>and</span> our <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>rafters of fir.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS2_1">1&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the rose of Sharon, <span class='add'>and</span> the lily of the valleys.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_2">2&#160;</span> As the lily among thorns, so <span class='add'>is</span> my love among the daughters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS2_3">3&#160;</span> As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so <span class='add'>is</span> my beloved among the sons. <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit <span class='add'>was</span> sweet to my <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>taste.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_4">4&#160;</span> He brought me to the <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>banqueting house, and his banner over me <span class='add'>was</span> love.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_5">5&#160;</span> Stay me with flagons, <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>comfort me with apples: for I <span class='add'>am</span> sick of love.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> His left hand <span class='add'>is</span> under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake <span class='add'>my</span> love, till he please.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS2_8">8&#160;</span>¶ The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_9">9&#160;</span><a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows, <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>shewing himself through the lattice.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_10">10&#160;</span> My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_11">11&#160;</span> For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over <span class='add'>and</span> gone;
<span class="verse" id="SS2_12">12&#160;</span> The flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing <span class='add'>of birds</span> is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land;
<span class="verse" id="SS2_13">13&#160;</span> The fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines <span class='add'>with</span> the tender grape give a <span class='add'>good</span> smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ O my dove, <span class='add'>that art</span> in the clefts of the rock, in the secret <span class='add'>places</span> of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet <span class='add'>is</span> thy voice, and thy countenance <span class='add'>is</span> comely.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_15">15&#160;</span> Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for our vines <span class='add'>have</span> tender grapes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS2_16">16&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>My beloved <span class='add'>is</span> mine, and I <span class='add'>am</span> his: he feedeth among the lilies.
<span class="verse" id="SS2_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of Bether.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS3_1">1&#160;</span> By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_2">2&#160;</span> I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_3">3&#160;</span> The watchmen that go about the city found me: <span class='add'>to whom I said</span>, Saw ye him whom my soul loveth?
<span class="verse" id="SS3_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It was</span> but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother’s house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake <span class='add'>my</span> love, till he please. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS3_6">6&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who <span class='add'>is</span> this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS3_7">7&#160;</span> Behold his bed, which <span class='add'>is</span> Solomon’s; threescore valiant men <span class='add'>are</span> about it, of the valiant of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_8">8&#160;</span> They all hold swords, <span class='add'>being</span> expert in war: every man <span class='add'>hath</span> his sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_9">9&#160;</span> King Solomon made himself <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_10">10&#160;</span> He made the pillars thereof <span class='add'>of</span> silver, the bottom thereof <span class='add'>of</span> gold, the covering of it <span class='add'>of</span> purple, the midst thereof being paved <span class='add'>with</span> love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="SS3_11">11&#160;</span> Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS4_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> fair, my love; behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> fair; thou <span class='add'>hast</span> doves’ eyes within thy locks: thy hair <span class='add'>is</span> as a <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>flock of goats, <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that appear from mount Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_2">2&#160;</span> Thy teeth <span class='add'>are</span> like a flock <span class='add'>of sheep that are even</span> shorn, which came up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none <span class='add'>is</span> barren among them.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_3">3&#160;</span> Thy lips <span class='add'>are</span> like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech <span class='add'>is</span> comely: thy temples <span class='add'>are</span> like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_4">4&#160;</span> Thy neck <span class='add'>is</span> like the tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thy two breasts <span class='add'>are</span> like two young roes that are twins, which feed among the lilies.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Until the day <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Thou <span class='add'>art</span> all fair, my love; <span class='add'>there is</span> no spot in thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS4_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Come with me from Lebanon, <span class='add'>my</span> spouse, with me from Lebanon: look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and Hermon, from the lions’ dens, from the mountains of the leopards.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_9">9&#160;</span> Thou hast <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>ravished my heart, my sister, <span class='add'>my</span> spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_10">10&#160;</span> How fair is thy love, my sister, <span class='add'>my</span> spouse! <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>how much better is thy love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices!
<span class="verse" id="SS4_11">11&#160;</span> Thy lips, O <span class='add'>my</span> spouse, drop <span class='add'>as</span> the honeycomb: honey and milk <span class='add'>are</span> under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments <span class='add'>is</span> like the smell of Lebanon.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_12">12&#160;</span> A garden <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>inclosed <span class='add'>is</span> my sister, <span class='add'>my</span> spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
<span class="verse" id="SS4_13">13&#160;</span> Thy plants <span class='add'>are</span> an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>camphire, with spikenard,
<span class="verse" id="SS4_14">14&#160;</span> Spikenard and saffron; calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS4_15">15&#160;</span> A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS4_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden, <span class='add'>that</span> the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS5_1">1&#160;</span> I am come into my garden, my sister, <span class='add'>my</span> spouse: I have gathered my myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS5_2">2&#160;</span>¶ I sleep, but my heart waketh: <span class='add'>it is</span> the voice of my beloved that knocketh, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, <span class='add'>and</span> my locks with the drops of the night.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_3">3&#160;</span> I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet; how shall I defile them?
<span class="verse" id="SS5_4">4&#160;</span> My beloved put in his hand by the hole <span class='add'>of the door</span>, and my bowels were moved <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for him.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_5">5&#160;</span> I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped <span class='add'>with</span> myrrh, and my fingers <span class='add'>with</span> <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the lock.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_6">6&#160;</span> I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had withdrawn himself, <span class='add'>and</span> was gone: my soul failed when he spake: I sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_7">7&#160;</span> The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me, they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_8">8&#160;</span> I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that ye tell him, that I <span class='add'>am</span> sick of love.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS5_9">9&#160;</span>¶ What <span class='add'>is</span> thy beloved more than <span class='add'>another</span> beloved, O thou fairest among women? what <span class='add'>is</span> thy beloved more than <span class='add'>another</span> beloved, that thou dost so charge us?
<span class="verse" id="SS5_10">10&#160;</span> My beloved <span class='add'>is</span> white and ruddy, <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the chiefest among ten thousand.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_11">11&#160;</span> His head <span class='add'>is as</span> the most fine gold, his locks <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bushy, <span class='add'>and</span> black as a raven.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> His eyes <span class='add'>are</span> as <span class='add'>the eyes</span> of doves by the rivers of <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>waters, washed with milk, <span class='add'>and</span> <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>fitly set.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_13">13&#160;</span> His cheeks <span class='add'>are</span> as a bed of spices, <span class='add'>as</span> <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sweet flowers: his lips <span class='add'>like</span> lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_14">14&#160;</span> His hands <span class='add'>are as</span> gold rings set with the beryl: his belly <span class='add'>is as</span> bright ivory overlaid <span class='add'>with</span> sapphires.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_15">15&#160;</span> His legs <span class='add'>are as</span> pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance <span class='add'>is</span> as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.
<span class="verse" id="SS5_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> His mouth <span class='add'>is</span> most sweet: yea, he <span class='add'>is</span> altogether lovely. This <span class='add'>is</span> my beloved, and this <span class='add'>is</span> my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS6_1">1&#160;</span> Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_2">2&#160;</span> My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> my beloved’s, and my beloved <span class='add'>is</span> mine: he feedeth among the lilies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS6_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Thou <span class='add'>art</span> beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as <span class='add'>an army</span> with banners.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_5">5&#160;</span> Turn away thine eyes from me, for <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>they have overcome me: thy hair <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_6">6&#160;</span> Thy teeth <span class='add'>are</span> as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof every one beareth twins, and <span class='add'>there is</span> not one barren among them.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_7">7&#160;</span> As a piece of a pomegranate <span class='add'>are</span> thy temples within thy locks.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_8">8&#160;</span> There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_9">9&#160;</span> My dove, my undefiled is <span class='add'>but</span> one; she <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='add'>only</span> one of her mother, she <span class='add'>is</span> the choice <span class='add'>one</span> of her that bare her. The daughters saw her, and blessed her; <span class='add'>yea</span>, the queens and the concubines, and they praised her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS6_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Who <span class='add'>is</span> she <span class='add'>that</span> looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, <span class='add'>and</span> terrible as <span class='add'>an army</span> with banners? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS6_11">11&#160;</span> I went down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the valley, <span class='add'>and</span> to see whether the vine flourished, <span class='add'>and</span> the pomegranates budded.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Or ever I was aware, my soul <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>made me <span class='add'>like</span> the chariots of Amminadib.
<span class="verse" id="SS6_13">13&#160;</span> Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look upon thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of two armies.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS7_1">1&#160;</span> How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince’s daughter! the joints of thy thighs <span class='add'>are</span> like jewels, the work of the hands of a cunning workman.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_2">2&#160;</span> Thy navel <span class='add'>is like</span> a round goblet, <span class='add'>which</span> wanteth not <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>liquor: thy belly <span class='add'>is like</span> an heap of wheat set about with lilies.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thy two breasts <span class='add'>are</span> like two young roes <span class='add'>that are</span> twins.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_4">4&#160;</span> Thy neck <span class='add'>is</span> as a tower of ivory; thine eyes <span class='add'>like</span> the fishpools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim: thy nose <span class='add'>is</span> as the tower of Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_5">5&#160;</span> Thine head upon thee <span class='add'>is</span> like <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Carmel, and the hair of thine head like purple; the king <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>held in the galleries.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_6">6&#160;</span> How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!
<span class="verse" id="SS7_7">7&#160;</span> This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters <span class='add'>of grapes</span>.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_8">8&#160;</span> I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy nose like apples;
<span class="verse" id="SS7_9">9&#160;</span> And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth <span class='add'>down</span> <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sweetly, causing the lips <a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>of those that are asleep to speak.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS7_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span> my beloved’s, and his desire <span class='add'>is</span> toward me.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_11">11&#160;</span> Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in the villages.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_12">12&#160;</span> Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the vine flourish, <span class='add'>whether</span> the tender grape <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>appear, <span class='add'>and</span> the pomegranates bud forth: there will I give thee my loves.
<span class="verse" id="SS7_13">13&#160;</span> The <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates <span class='add'>are</span> all manner of pleasant <span class='add'>fruits</span>, new and old, <span class='add'>which</span> I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SS8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS8_1">1&#160;</span> O that thou <span class='add'>wert</span> as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my mother! <span class='add'>when</span> I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I should not be despised.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_2">2&#160;</span> I would lead thee, <span class='add'>and</span> bring thee into my mother’s house, <span class='add'>who</span> would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> His left hand <span class='add'>should be</span> under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that ye stir not up, nor awake <span class='add'>my</span> love, until he please.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS8_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who <span class='add'>is</span> this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth: there she brought thee forth <span class='add'>that</span> bare thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS8_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love <span class='add'>is</span> strong as death; jealousy <span class='add'>is</span> <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>cruel as the grave: the coals thereof <span class='add'>are</span> coals of fire, <span class='add'>which hath a</span> most vehement flame.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_7">7&#160;</span> Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if <span class='add'>a</span> man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS8_8">8&#160;</span>¶ We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
<span class="verse" id="SS8_9">9&#160;</span>If she <span class='add'>be</span> a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she <span class='add'>be</span> a door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_10">10&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as one that found <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>favour.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_11">11&#160;</span> Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon; he let out the vineyard unto keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver.
<span class="verse" id="SS8_12">12&#160;</span> My vineyard, which <span class='add'>is</span> mine, <span class='add'>is</span> before me: thou, O Solomon, <span class='add'>must have</span> a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS8_13">13&#160;</span> Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice: cause me to hear <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SS8_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices.</div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_10'>4. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thy loves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_44'>6. 44</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they love thee uprightly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, as one that is veiled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cypress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_1'>4 1</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS5_12'>5 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, my companion.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS1_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, galleries.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I delighted and sat down, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. house of wine.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. straw me with apples.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_3'>8 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb I adjure you.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS3_5'>3. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_4'>8. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">ver. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_17'>17.</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb flourishing.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS6_8'>6. 8</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_6'>4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_14'>8 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS2_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of division.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_7'>2. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_4'>8 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS3_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS8_5'>8 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS3_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, a bed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS1_15'>1. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS5_12'>5. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. 6. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS6_5'>5</a>, <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS6_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, that eat of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS7_3'>7 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_17'>2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. breathe.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 mountains]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Eph. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_27'>5. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, taken away my heart.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS1_2'>1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. barred.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS4_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, cypress.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and be drunken with loves.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, (as some read) in me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. passing, or, running about.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. what.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a standard-bearer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, curled.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS1_15'>1. 15</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_1'>4. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 water]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sitting in fulness, that is, fitly placed, and set as a precious stone in the foil of a ring.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, towers of perfumes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS5_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. His palate.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_16'>2. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS7_10'>7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they have puffed me up.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 4 <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_1'>1</a>, <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_2'>2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 omits as]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I knew not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, set me on the chariots of my willing people.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS6_13"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of Mahanaim.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. mixture.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_5'>4. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, crimson.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bound.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. straightly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, of the ancient.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_16'>2. 16</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS6_3'>6. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. open.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gen. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN30_14'>30. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they should not despise me.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_2'>9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_6'>2. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS2_7'>2. 7</a>. &amp;c <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS3_5'>3 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. why should ye stir up, or why, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='SNG.xhtml#SS3_6'>3. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. hard.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SS8_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Flee away.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
