<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Susanna 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Susanna</a></li>
</ul>
<div class='main' id='SN0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The History of Susanna [in Daniel] </div>
<div class='is'>Set apart from the beginning of Daniel, because it is not in Hebrew, as neither the Narration of <a href='#FN1' id="001"  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Bel and the Dragon.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SN1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="SN1_1">1&#160;</span>There dwelt a man in Babylon, called <a href='#FN2'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Joacim: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_2">2&#160;</span>And he took a wife, whose name was <a href='#FN3'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Susanna, the daughter of <a href='#FN4'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Chelcias, a very <a href='#FN5'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>fair woman, and one that feared the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_3">3&#160;</span>Her parents also were <a href='#FN6'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>righteous, and taught their daughter according to the law of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_4">4&#160;</span>Now Joacim was <a href='#FN7'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>a great rich man, and had a <a href='#FN8'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>fair garden joining unto his house: and to him resorted the Jews; because he was more honourable than all others. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>The same year were appointed two of the <a href='#FN10'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>ancients of the people to be judges, such as the <a href='#FN11'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>Lord spake of, <a href='#FN12'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>that wickedness came from Babylon from ancient judges, who <a href='#FN13'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>seemed to govern the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_6">6&#160;</span>These <a href='#FN14'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>kept much at Joacim’s house: and all that had any suits in law came unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_7">7&#160;</span>Now when the people departed away <a href='#FN15'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>at noon, Susanna went into her husband’s <a href='#FN16'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>garden to walk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_8">8&#160;</span>And the two elders saw her going in every day, and walking; so that their lust was inflamed toward her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_9">9&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN17'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>they perverted their own mind, and turned away their eyes, that they might not look unto heaven, nor remember just judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_10">10&#160;</span>And albeit they both were <a href='#FN18'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>wounded with her love, yet durst not one shew another his grief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_11">11&#160;</span>For they were ashamed to declare their lust, that they desired to have to do with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_12">12&#160;</span>Yet they watched diligently from day to day to see her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_13">13&#160;</span>And the one said to the other, Let us now go home: <a href='#FN19'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>for it is dinner time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_14">14&#160;</span>So when they were gone out, they parted the one from the other, and turning back again they came to the same place; and after that they had asked one another the cause, they acknowledged their lust: then appointed they a time both together, when they might find her alone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_15">15&#160;</span>And it fell out, as they watched a <a href='#FN20'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>fit time, she went in <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as before with two maids only, and she was desirous to wash herself in the <a href='#FN22'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>garden: for it was hot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_16">16&#160;</span>And there was no body there save the two elders, that had hid themselves, and watched her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_17">17&#160;</span>Then she said to her maids, Bring me oil and washing balls, and shut the <a href='#FN23'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>garden doors, that I may wash me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_18">18&#160;</span>And they did as she bade them, and shut the <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>garden doors, and went out themselves at <a href='#FN25'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>privy doors to fetch the things that she had commanded them: but they saw not the elders, because they were hid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_19">19&#160;</span>Now when the maids were gone forth, the two elders rose up, and ran unto her, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_20">20&#160;</span>Behold, the garden doors are shut, that no man can see us, and we are in love with thee; therefore consent unto us, and lie with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_21">21&#160;</span>If thou wilt not, we will bear witness against thee, that a young man was with thee: and therefore thou didst send away thy maids from thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_22">22&#160;</span>Then Susanna <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>sighed, and said, I am straitened on every side: for if I do this thing, <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>it is death unto me: and if I do it not I cannot escape your hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_23">23&#160;</span>It is better for me to fall into your hands, and not do it, than to sin in the sight of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_24">24&#160;</span>With that Susanna cried with a loud voice: and the two elders cried out against her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_25">25&#160;</span>Then ran the one, and opened the garden door. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_26">26&#160;</span>So when the servants of the house heard the cry in the garden, they rushed in at the <a href='#FN28'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>privy door, to see what was done unto her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_27">27&#160;</span>But when the elders had declared their matter, the servants were greatly ashamed: for there was never such a report made of Susanna. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_28">28&#160;</span>And it came to pass the next day, <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>when the people were assembled to her husband Joacim, the two elders came also full of mischievous <a href='#FN30'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>imagination against Susanna <a href='#FN31'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>to put her to death; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_29">29&#160;</span>And said before the people, Send for Susanna, the daughter of <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Chelcias, <a href='#FN33'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Joacim’s wife. And so they sent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_30">30&#160;</span>So she came with her father and mother, her children, and all her kindred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_31">31&#160;</span>Now Susanna was a very <a href='#FN34'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>delicate woman, and <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>beauteous to behold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_32">32&#160;</span>And these wicked men commanded to uncover her face, (<a href='#FN36'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>for she was covered) that they might be filled with her beauty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_33">33&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>her friends and all that saw her wept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_34">34&#160;</span>Then the two elders stood up in the midst of the people, and <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>laid their hands upon her head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_35">35&#160;</span>And she weeping looked up toward heaven: for her heart trusted in the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_36">36&#160;</span>And the elders said, As we walked in the garden alone, this woman came in with two maids, and shut the garden doors, and sent the maids away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_37">37&#160;</span>Then a young man, who there was hid, came unto her, and lay with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_38">38&#160;</span>Then we that stood in a corner of the garden, seeing this wickedness, ran unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_39">39&#160;</span>And when we saw them together, the man we could not hold: for he was stronger than we, and opened the door, and leaped out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_40">40&#160;</span>But having taken this woman, we asked who the young man was, but she would not tell us: these things do we testify. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_41">41&#160;</span>Then the assembly believed them as those that were <a href='#FN39'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the elders and judges of the people: so <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>they condemned her to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_42">42&#160;</span>Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and said, O everlasting God, <a href='#FN41'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that knowest the secrets, and <a href='#FN42'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>knowest all things before they be: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_43">43&#160;</span>Thou knowest that they have borne false witness against me, and, behold, I must die; whereas I never did such things as these men have maliciously invented against me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_44">44&#160;</span>And the Lord heard her voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_45">45&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>when she was led <a href='#FN44'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>to be put to death, <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the Lord raised up the holy spirit of a young youth whose name was Daniel: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_46">46&#160;</span>Who cried with a loud voice, <a href='#FN46'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>I am clear from the blood of this woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_47">47&#160;</span>Then all the people turned them toward him, and said, What mean these words that thou hast spoken? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_48">48&#160;</span>So he standing in the midst of them said, Are ye such fools, ye sons of Israel, that without examination or knowledge of the truth ye have condemned <a href='#FN47'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a daughter of Israel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_49">49&#160;</span>Return again to the place of judgment: for they have borne false witness against her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_50">50&#160;</span>Wherefore all the people turned again in haste, and <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the elders said unto him, Come, <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>sit down among us, and shew it us, seeing God hath given thee the honour of an elder. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_51">51&#160;</span>Then said Daniel unto them, Put these two aside one far from another, and I will examine them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_52">52&#160;</span>So when they were put asunder one from another, he called one of them, and said unto him, O thou that art waxen old in wickedness, now thy sins which thou hast committed aforetime are come to light. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_53">53&#160;</span>For thou hast pronounced false judgment and hast condemned the innocent and hast let the guilty go free; albeit the Lord saith, <a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>The innocent and righteous shalt thou not slay. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_54">54&#160;</span>Now then, if thou hast seen her, tell me, Under what tree sawest thou them companying together? Who answered, Under a <a href='#FN51'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mastick tree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_55">55&#160;</span>And Daniel said, Very well; thou hast lied against thine own head; for even now the angel of God hath received the sentence of God to <a href='#FN52'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>cut thee in two. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_56">56&#160;</span>So he put him aside, and commanded to bring the other, and said unto him, O thou seed of <a href='#FN53'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>Chanaan, and not of Juda, beauty hath deceived thee, and lust hath <a href='#FN54'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>perverted thine heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_57">57&#160;</span>Thus have ye dealt with <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the daughters of Israel, and they for fear companied with you: but <a href='#FN56'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the daughter of Juda would not abide your wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_58">58&#160;</span>Now therefore tell me, Under what tree didst thou take them companying together? Who answered, Under an <a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>holm tree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_59">59&#160;</span>Then said Daniel unto him, Well; thou hast also lied against thine own head: for the angel of God waiteth with the sword to <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a><a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>cut thee in two, that he may destroy you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_60">60&#160;</span>With that all <a href='#FN60'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the assembly cried out with a loud voice, and praised God, who saveth <a href='#FN61'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>them that trust in him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_61">61&#160;</span>And they arose against the two elders, for <a href='#FN62'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>Daniel had convicted them of false witness by their own mouth: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_62">62&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN63'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>according to the law of Moses they did unto them in such sort as they maliciously intended to do to their neighbour: and they put them to death. Thus the innocent blood was saved the same day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_63">63&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN64'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>Chelcias and his wife praised God for their daughter Susanna, with Joacim her husband, and all the kindred, because there was no dishonesty found in her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="SN1_64">64&#160;</span>From that day forth was Daniel had in great reputation in the sight of the people. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#001"><span class="notemark">*</span></a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>Bel’s Dragon</span>. Bel and Drag., title.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_29'>ver. 29</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_63'>63</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_7'>Baruch 1. 7</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK8_3'>Luke 8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_29'>ver. 29</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_63'>63</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_7'>Baruch 1. 7</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_2"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_2'>ver. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_6'>Luke 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_13'>Tobit 1. 13</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_14'>14</a>, <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB1_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>15</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_17'>17</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>18</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_30'>Ecclus. 24. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_8'>Esth. 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_41'>ver. 41</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_50'>50</a> (Gk.). See <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT6_16'>Judith 6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_24'>Ecclus. 34. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR29_22'>Jer. 29. 22</a>,<a href='JER.xhtml#JR29_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_5"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_42'>Mark 10. 42</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_6"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_42'>Acts 2. 42</a> (Gk.). So <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_28'>ver. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_7"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_16'>Gen. 43. 16</a>. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_7"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>15</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_17'>17</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>18</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_30'>Ecclus. 24. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_39'>Num. 15. 39</a> (Gk.). <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_56'>ver. 56</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_1'>Ecclus. 14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN43_16'>Gen. 43. 16</a>. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_62'>Luke 9. 62</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>as yesterday and the day before</span>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M19_44'>1 Macc. 9. 44</a>. See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_2'>Gen. 31. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_15"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>15</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_17'>17</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>18</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_30'>Ecclus. 24. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_17"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>15</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_17'>17</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>18</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_30'>Ecclus. 24. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_7'>ver. 7</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_15'>15</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_17'>17</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>18</a> (Gk.). See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_30'>Ecclus. 24. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>side doors</span>. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_26'>ver. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_22"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_30'>2 Macc. 6. 30</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_12'>Mark 8. 12</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_22"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_41'>41</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_45'>45</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_10'>Lev. 20. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_26"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_18'>ver. 18</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_28"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_28"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB4_12'>Heb. 4. 12</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_1'>1 Pet. 4. 1</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_28"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_28'>ver. 28</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_41'>41</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_45'>45</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_10'>Lev. 20. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_29'>ver. 29</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_63'>63</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_7'>Baruch 1. 7</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_29"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_29'>ver. 29</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_63'>63</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR1_7'>Baruch 1. 7</a>?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_31"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='BAR.xhtml#BR4_26'>Baruch 4. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_31"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.31</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_2'>ver. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_32"><span class="notemark">y</span> 1.32</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN24_65'>Gen. 24. 65</a> or <a href='2SA.xhtml#S215_30'>2 Sam. 15. 30</a>. &amp; <a href='2SA.xhtml#S219_4'>19. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_33"><span class="notemark">z</span> 1.33</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_15'>1 Macc. 2. 15</a>, <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_17'>17</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_21'>Mark 3. 21</a> in the Gk. Comp. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_30'>ver. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_34"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.34</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_14'>Lev. 24. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_41"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_5'>ver. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_41"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.41</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_42"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.42</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC1_24'>Acts 1. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_42"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.42</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_1'>Ps. 139. 1–4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_45"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.45</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_18'>Baruch 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_45"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_45"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.45</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_22'>2 Chr. 36. 22</a>. <a href='HAG.xhtml#HG1_14'>Hagg. 1. 14</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_46"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.46</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_24'>Matt. 27. 24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_48"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.48</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_50"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.50</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_5'>ver. 5</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_50"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.50</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_46'>Luke 2. 46</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_53"><span class="notemark">j</span> 1.53</a>
 <span class="ft">Cited from <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_7'>Exod. 23. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_54"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.54</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>lentisk tree</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_55"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.55</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_59'>ver. 59</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_51'>Matt. 24. 51</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_46'>Luke 12. 46</a>. Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_11'>Jer. 1. 11</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_12'>12</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_25'>Dan. 5. 25–28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_56"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.56</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_3'>Ezek. 16. 3</a>. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS12_7'>Hos. 12. 7</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_56"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.56</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_57"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_57"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.57</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_48'>ver. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_58"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.58</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>kind of oak</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_59"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.59</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_59'>ver. 59</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_51'>Matt. 24. 51</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_46'>Luke 12. 46</a>. Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_11'>Jer. 1. 11</a>, <a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_12'>12</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN5_25'>Dan. 5. 25–28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_59"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.59</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_37'>Heb. 11 37</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_60"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.60</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_41'>ver. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_60"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.60</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_35'>ver. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_61"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.61</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_8'>Ecclus. 42. 8</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_62"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.62</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_16'>Deut. 19. 16–19</a>. So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_5'>Prov. 19. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SN1_63"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.63</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_2'>ver. 2</a>, <a href='SUS.xhtml#SN1_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

