<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Titus 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Titus</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='TIT.xhtml#TT1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='TIT.xhtml#TT2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='TIT.xhtml#TT3_0'>3</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='TT0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL THE APOSTLE TO TITUS  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='TT1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="TT1_1">1&#160;</span> Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God’s elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness;
<span class="verse" id="TT1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the world began;
<span class="verse" id="TT1_3">3&#160;</span> But hath in due times manifested his word through preaching, which is committed unto me according to the commandment of God our Saviour;
<span class="verse" id="TT1_4">4&#160;</span> To Titus, <span class='add'>mine</span> own son after the common faith: Grace, mercy, <span class='add'>and</span> peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="TT1_5">5&#160;</span> For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed thee:
<span class="verse" id="TT1_6">6&#160;</span> If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children not accused of riot or unruly.
<span class="verse" id="TT1_7">7&#160;</span> For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God; not selfwilled, not soon angry, <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre;
<span class="verse" id="TT1_8">8&#160;</span> But a lover of hospitality, a lover of <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>good men, sober, just, holy, temperate;
<span class="verse" id="TT1_9">9&#160;</span> Holding fast the faithful word <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>as he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers.
<span class="verse" id="TT1_10">10&#160;</span> For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision:
<span class="verse" id="TT1_11">11&#160;</span> Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake.
<span class="verse" id="TT1_12">12&#160;</span> One of themselves, <span class='add'>even</span> a prophet of their own, said, The Cretians <span class='add'>are</span> alway liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.
<span class="verse" id="TT1_13">13&#160;</span> This witness is true. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith;
<span class="verse" id="TT1_14">14&#160;</span> Not giving heed to Jewish fables, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth.
<span class="verse" id="TT1_15">15&#160;</span> Unto the pure all things <span class='add'>are</span> pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving <span class='add'>is</span> nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
<span class="verse" id="TT1_16">16&#160;</span> They profess that they know God; but in works they deny <span class='add'>him</span>, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>reprobate.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='TT2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="TT2_1">1&#160;</span> But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine:
<span class="verse" id="TT2_2">2&#160;</span> That the aged men be <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience.
<span class="verse" id="TT2_3">3&#160;</span> The aged women likewise, that <span class='add'>they be</span> in behaviour as becometh <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>holiness, not <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things;
<span class="verse" id="TT2_4">4&#160;</span> That they may teach the young women to be <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sober, to love their husbands, to love their children,
<span class="verse" id="TT2_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>To be</span> discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed.
<span class="verse" id="TT2_6">6&#160;</span> Young men likewise exhort to be <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>sober minded.
<span class="verse" id="TT2_7">7&#160;</span> In all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine <span class='add'>shewing</span> uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity,
<span class="verse" id="TT2_8">8&#160;</span> Sound speech, that cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.
<span class="verse" id="TT2_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Exhort</span> servants to be obedient unto their own masters, <span class='add'>and</span> to please <span class='add'>them</span> well in all <span class='add'>things</span>; not <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>answering again;
<span class="verse" id="TT2_10">10&#160;</span> Not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things.
<span class="verse" id="TT2_11">11&#160;</span> For the grace of God <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,
<span class="verse" id="TT2_12">12&#160;</span> Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world;
<span class="verse" id="TT2_13">13&#160;</span> Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ;
<span class="verse" id="TT2_14">14&#160;</span> Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
<span class="verse" id="TT2_15">15&#160;</span> These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='TT3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="TT3_1">1&#160;</span> Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every good work,
<span class="verse" id="TT3_2">2&#160;</span> To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, <span class='add'>but</span> gentle, shewing all meekness unto all men.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_3">3&#160;</span> For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, <span class='add'>and</span> hating one another.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_4">4&#160;</span> But after that the kindness and <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>love of God our Saviour toward man appeared,
<span class="verse" id="TT3_5">5&#160;</span> Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost;
<span class="verse" id="TT3_6">6&#160;</span> Which he shed on us <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour;
<span class="verse" id="TT3_7">7&#160;</span> That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>This is</span> a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and profitable unto men.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_9">9&#160;</span> But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_10">10&#160;</span> A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition reject;
<span class="verse" id="TT3_11">11&#160;</span> Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="TT3_12">12&#160;</span> When I shall send Artemas unto thee, or Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_13">13&#160;</span> Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_14">14&#160;</span> And let ours also learn to <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.
<span class="verse" id="TT3_15">15&#160;</span> All that are with me salute thee. Greet them that love us in the faith. Grace <span class='add'>be</span> with you all. Amen. </div>
<div class='s'>It was written to Titus, ordained the first bishop of the church of the Cretians, from Nicopolis of Macedonia. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT1_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">For.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT1_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">left undone.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Tim. <a href='1TI.xhtml#T13_3'>3. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT1_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">good things.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT1_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">in teaching.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT1_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">void of judgment.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">vigilant.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">holy women.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">makebates.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">wise.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">discreet.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">gainsaying.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT2_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">that bringeth salvation to all men, hath appeared.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT3_4"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">pity.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT3_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr <span class="add">richly.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#TT3_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">profess honest trades.</span></span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
