<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Wisdom 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Wisdom</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_0'>19</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='WS0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Wisdom or The Wisdom of Solomon  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="WS1_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Love righteousness, ye that be judges of the earth: think of the Lord with a good (heart,) and in simplicity of heart seek him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_2">2&#160;</span>For he will be found of them that tempt him not; and <a href='#FN2'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>sheweth himself unto such as do not distrust him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_3">3&#160;</span>For froward thoughts separate from God: and his power, when it is tried, <a href='#FN3'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>reproveth the unwise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_4">4&#160;</span>For into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter; nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_5">5&#160;</span>For the holy spirit of discipline will flee deceit, and <a href='#FN4'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>remove from thoughts that are without understanding, and <a href='#FN5'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>will not abide when unrighteousness cometh in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_6">6&#160;</span>For wisdom is a <a href='#FN6'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>loving spirit; and will not acquit a blasphemer of his <a href='#FN7'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>words: for <a href='#FN8'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>God is witness of his reins, and a true <a href='#FN9'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>beholder of his heart, and a hearer of his tongue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_7">7&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN10'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the Spirit of the Lord filleth <a href='#FN11'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the world: and that which <a href='#FN12'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>containeth all things <a href='#FN13'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>hath knowledge of the voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore he that speaketh unrighteous things cannot be hid: neither shall vengeance, when it <a href='#FN14'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>punisheth, pass by him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_9">9&#160;</span>For inquisition shall be made into the counsels of the ungodly: and the sound of his words shall come unto the Lord for the <a href='#FN15'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>manifestation of his wicked deeds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_10">10&#160;</span>For the ear of <a href='#FN16'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>jealousy heareth all things: and the noise of <a href='#FN17'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>murmurings is not hid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore beware of <a href='#FN18'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>murmuring, which is unprofitable; and refrain your tongue from <a href='#FN19'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>backbiting: for <a href='#FN20'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>there is no word so secret, that shall go for nought: and the mouth that <a href='#FN21'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>belieth <a href='#FN22'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>oo</a>slayeth the soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Seek not death in the error of your life: and <a href='#FN24'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>pull not upon yourselves destruction with the works of your hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>For God made not death: <a href='#FN26'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>neither hath he pleasure in the destruction of the living. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_14">14&#160;</span>For he created all things, that they might have their being: and <a href='#FN27'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the generations of the world were healthful; and there is no poison of destruction in them, nor the kingdom of death upon the earth: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_15">15&#160;</span>(For righteousness is immortal:) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_16">16&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN28'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>ungodly men with their works and words called it to them: for when they thought to have it their friend, they consumed to nought, and <a href='#FN29'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>made a covenant with it, because they are worthy <a href='#FN30'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>to take part with it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_1">1&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN31'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the ungodly said, reasoning with themselves, but not aright, <a href='#FN32'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>Our life is short and tedious, and <a href='#FN33'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>in the death of a man there is no remedy: neither was there any man known to have <a href='#FN34'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>returned from the grave. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_2">2&#160;</span>For we are born at all adventure: and <a href='#FN35'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>we shall be hereafter as though we had never been: for the breath in our nostrils is as <a href='#FN36'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>smoke, and a little spark in the moving of our heart: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_3">3&#160;</span>Which being extinguished, <a href='#FN37'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>our body shall be turned into ashes, and our spirit shall vanish as the <a href='#FN38'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>soft air, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_4">4&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN39'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>our name shall be forgotten in time, and no man shall have our works in remembrance, and <a href='#FN40'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>our life shall pass away as the trace of a cloud, and shall be dispersed as a mist, that is driven away with the beams of the sun, and <a href='#FN41'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>overcome with the heat thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_5">5&#160;</span>For our time is <a href='#FN42'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>a very shadow that passeth away; and after our end there is no returning: for <a href='#FN43'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>it is <a href='#FN44'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>fast sealed, so that no man cometh again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_6">6&#160;</span>Come on therefore, <a href='#FN45'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>let us enjoy the good things that are present: and let us <a href='#FN46'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>speedily use the creatures like as in youth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_7">7&#160;</span>Let us fill ourselves with costly wine and ointments: and let no flower of the spring pass by us: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_8">8&#160;</span>Let us <a href='#FN47'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ll</a>crown ourselves with rosebuds, before they be withered: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_9">9&#160;</span>Let none of us go without his part of our <a href='#FN48'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>voluptuousness: let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every place: <a href='#FN49'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>for this is our portion, and our lot is this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_10">10&#160;</span>Let us oppress the poor righteous man, let us not spare the widow, nor reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_11">11&#160;</span>Let our strength be the law of justice: for that which is feeble <a href='#FN50'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>is found to be nothing worth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN51'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>let us lie in wait for the righteous; because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings: he upbraideth us with our offending the law, and objecteth to our infamy the transgressings of our education. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_13">13&#160;</span>He professeth to have the knowledge of God: and he calleth himself the child of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>He was made <a href='#FN53'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>to reprove our thoughts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>He is grievous unto us even to behold: for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_16">16&#160;</span>We are esteemed of him as <a href='#FN55'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN56'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>counterfeits: he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness: <a href='#FN57'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed, and <a href='#FN58'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>maketh his boast that God is his father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_17">17&#160;</span>Let us see if his words be true: and let us prove what shall happen in <a href='#FN59'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the end of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_18">18&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN60'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>if the just man be <a href='#FN61'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the son of God, he will help him, and deliver him from the hand of his enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>Let us examine him with despitefulness and torture, that we may know his <a href='#FN63'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>meekness, and prove his <a href='#FN64'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>patience. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_20">20&#160;</span>Let us condemn him with a shameful death: for <a href='#FN65'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>by his own saying he shall be <a href='#FN66'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>respected. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_21">21&#160;</span>Such things they did imagine, and were deceived: for <a href='#FN67'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>their own wickedness hath blinded them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_22">22&#160;</span>As for the <a href='#FN68'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>mysteries of God, they knew them not: neither hoped they for the wages of righteousness, nor <a href='#FN69'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>discerned a reward for blameless souls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_23">23&#160;</span><a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>For God created man to be immortal, and made him to be <a href='#FN71'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>an image of his own eternity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_24">24&#160;</span>Nevertheless <a href='#FN72'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>through envy of the devil came death into the world: and <a href='#FN73'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they that do hold of his side do find it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_1">1&#160;</span>But the souls of the righteous are <a href='#FN74'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_2">2&#160;</span>In the sight of <a href='#FN75'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the unwise they seemed to die: and their <a href='#FN76'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>departure is taken for misery, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_3">3&#160;</span>And their going from us to be <a href='#FN77'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>utter destruction: but they are in peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_4">4&#160;</span>For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their <a href='#FN78'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>hope full of immortality. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_5">5&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN79'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly <a href='#FN80'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>rewarded: for <a href='#FN81'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>God proved them, and found them <a href='#FN82'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>worthy for himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>As gold in the furnace hath he tried them, and received them as a burnt offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_7">7&#160;</span>And in the time of their <a href='#FN84'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>visitation <a href='#FN85'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the people, and <a href='#FN87'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>their Lord shall reign for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_9">9&#160;</span>They that put their trust in him <a href='#FN88'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>shall understand the truth: <a href='#FN89'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>and such as be faithful in love shall <a href='#FN90'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>abide with him: for <a href='#FN91'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>grace and mercy is to his saints, <a href='#FN92'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>and he hath <a href='#FN93'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>care for his <a href='#FN94'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>elect. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_10">10&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN95'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the ungodly shall be punished according to their own imaginations, which have neglected the righteous, and forsaken the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_11">11&#160;</span>For whoso <a href='#FN96'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>despiseth wisdom and nurture, he is miserable, and their hope is vain, their labours unfruitful, and their works unprofitable: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_12">12&#160;</span>Their wives are <a href='#FN97'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>foolish, and their children wicked: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_13">13&#160;</span>Their offspring is cursed. Wherefore blessed is the barren that is <a href='#FN98'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>undefiled, which hath not known the sinful <a href='#FN99'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>bed: <a href='#FN100'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>she shall have fruit in the <a href='#FN101'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>visitation of souls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_14">14&#160;</span>And blessed is <a href='#FN102'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the eunuch, which with his hands hath wrought no iniquity, nor imagined wicked things against God: for unto him shall be given <a href='#FN103'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the special gift of faith, and an inheritance <a href='#FN104'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in <a href='#FN105'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>the temple of the Lord more acceptable to his mind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_15">15&#160;</span>For glorious is the fruit of good labours: and <a href='#FN106'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>the root of wisdom shall never fall away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_16">16&#160;</span>As for <a href='#FN107'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the children of adulterers, <a href='#FN108'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>they shall not <a href='#FN109'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>come to their perfection, and the seed of an unrighteous bed shall be rooted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_17">17&#160;</span>For though they live long, yet shall they be nothing regarded: and their last age shall be without honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_18">18&#160;</span>Or, if they die quickly, <a href='#FN110'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>they have no hope, neither <a href='#FN111'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>comfort in the day of <a href='#FN112'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>trial. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_19">19&#160;</span>For horrible is the end of the unrighteous generation.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_1">1&#160;</span>Better it is to have no children, and to have virtue: for the memorial thereof is immortal: because it is <a href='#FN113'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>known <a href='#FN114'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>with God, and with men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_2">2&#160;</span>When it is present, men take example at it; and when it is gone, they desire it: <a href='#FN115'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>it weareth a crown, and triumpheth for ever, having gotten the victory, <a href='#FN116'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>striving for undefiled rewards. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_3">3&#160;</span>But the multiplying brood of the ungodly shall not thrive, <a href='#FN117'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>nor take deep rooting from bastard slips, nor lay any fast foundation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_4">4&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN118'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>though they flourish in branches for a time; yet standing not fast, <a href='#FN119'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>they shall be shaken with the wind, and through the force of winds they shall be rooted out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_5">5&#160;</span>The <a href='#FN120'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>imperfect branches <a href='#FN121'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>shall be broken off, their fruit unprofitable, not ripe to eat, yea, meet for nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>For children begotten of unlawful <a href='#FN123'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>beds are witnesses of wickedness against their parents in their trial. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_7">7&#160;</span>But though the righteous be <a href='#FN124'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_8">8&#160;</span>For honourable age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number of years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_9">9&#160;</span>But wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>He pleased God, and was beloved of him: so that living among sinners he was translated. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_11">11&#160;</span>Yea <a href='#FN126'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>speedily was he taken away, lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_12">12&#160;</span>For the bewitching of naughtiness <a href='#FN127'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>doth obscure things that are honest; and the wandering of concupiscence doth <a href='#FN128'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>undermine the simple mind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_13">13&#160;</span>He, <a href='#FN129'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>being made <a href='#FN130'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>perfect in a short time, fulfilled a long time: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_14">14&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN131'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>his soul pleased the Lord: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_15">15&#160;</span>This the people saw, and understood it not, neither laid they up this in their minds, That his <a href='#FN132'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>grace and mercy is with his saints, and that he hath <a href='#FN133'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>nn</a>respect unto his chosen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_16">16&#160;</span>Thus the righteous that is <a href='#FN134'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>dead shall <a href='#FN135'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>oo</a>condemn the ungodly which are living; and <a href='#FN136'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>youth that is soon perfected the many years and old age of the unrighteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_17">17&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN137'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>they shall see the end of the wise, and shall not understand what God in his counsel hath decreed of him, and to what end the Lord hath set him in safety. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_18">18&#160;</span>They shall see him, and despise him; but God shall laugh them to scorn: and they shall hereafter be a vile carcase, and a reproach among the dead for evermore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_19">19&#160;</span>For he shall rend them, and cast them down headlong, that they shall be speechless; and he shall shake them from the foundation; and they shall be utterly laid waste, and be in sorrow; and <a href='#FN138'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>their memorial shall perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_20">20&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN139'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>when they cast up the accounts of their sins, they shall come with fear: and their own iniquities shall convince them to their face.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_1">1&#160;</span>Then shall the righteous man <a href='#FN140'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his labours. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_2">2&#160;</span>When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_3">3&#160;</span>And they repenting and groaning for <a href='#FN141'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>anguish of spirit shall say within themselves, This was he, whom we had sometimes in derision, and a <a href='#FN142'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>proverb of reproach: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_4">4&#160;</span>We <a href='#FN143'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honour: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_5">5&#160;</span>How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the saints! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness hath not shined unto us, and the sun of righteousness rose not upon us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_7">7&#160;</span>We <a href='#FN144'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wearied ourselves in the way of wickedness and destruction: yea, we have gone through deserts, where <a href='#FN145'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>there lay no way: but as for the way of the Lord, we have not known it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_8">8&#160;</span>What hath pride profited us? or what good hath riches with our vaunting brought us? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_9">9&#160;</span>All those things are passed away <a href='#FN146'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>like a shadow, and <a href='#FN147'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>as a post that hasted by; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_10">10&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN148'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>as a ship that passeth over the waves of the water, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found, neither the pathway of the keel in the waves; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_11">11&#160;</span>Or <a href='#FN149'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>as when a bird <a href='#FN150'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hath flown through the air, there is no <a href='#FN151'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>token of her way to be found, but the light air being beaten with the stroke of her wings and parted with the violent noise and motion of them, is passed through, and therein afterwards no sign where she went is to be found; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_12">12&#160;</span>Or like as when an arrow is shot <a href='#FN152'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>at a mark, it parteth the air, which immediately cometh together again, so that a man cannot know where it went through: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_13">13&#160;</span>Even so we in like manner, as soon as we were born, began to draw to our end, and had no sign of virtue to shew; but were consumed in our own wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_14">14&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN153'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the hope of the ungodly is like <a href='#FN154'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>dust <a href='#FN155'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>that is blown away with the wind; like a <a href='#FN156'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>thin froth that is driven away with the storm; <a href='#FN157'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>like as the smoke which is dispersed here and there with a tempest, and passeth away as the remembrance of a guest that tarrieth but a day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_15">15&#160;</span>But the righteous live for evermore; <a href='#FN158'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>their reward also is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the most High. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore shall they receive a glorious <a href='#FN159'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kingdom, and a beautiful <a href='#FN160'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>crown from the Lord’s hand: for <a href='#FN161'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>with his right hand shall he cover them, and with his arm shall he protect them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_17">17&#160;</span>He shall take to him <a href='#FN162'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>his jealousy for <a href='#FN163'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>complete armour, and <a href='#FN164'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>make the creature his weapon for the revenge of his enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN165' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>He shall put on righteousness as a breastplate, and <a href='#FN166'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ss</a>true judgment instead of an helmet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_19">19&#160;</span>He shall take <a href='#FN167'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>holiness for an invincible shield. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_20">20&#160;</span>His severe wrath shall he sharpen for a sword, and <a href='#FN168'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the world shall fight with him against the unwise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_21">21&#160;</span>Then shall the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, <a href='#FN169'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>as from a well drawn bow, shall they fly <a href='#FN170'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to the mark. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_22">22&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN171'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>hailstones full of wrath shall be cast as out of a stone bow, and the water of the sea shall rage against them, and <a href='#FN172'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>the floods shall cruelly drown them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_23">23&#160;</span>Yea, <a href='#FN173'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a><a href='#FN174'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and <a href='#FN175'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>like a storm shall blow them away: thus iniquity shall lay waste the whole earth, and ill dealing shall overthrow <a href='#FN176'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the thrones of the mighty.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN177' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Hear therefore, O ye kings, and understand; learn, ye that be judges of the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_2">2&#160;</span>Give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the multitude of nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_3">3&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN178'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>power is given you of the Lord, and sovereignty from the Highest, who shall try your works, and search out your counsels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_4">4&#160;</span>Because, being <a href='#FN179'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>ministers of his kingdom, ye have not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor walked after the counsel of God; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_5">5&#160;</span>Horribly and speedily shall he come upon you: for a sharp judgment shall be to them that be in high places. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_6">6&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN180'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>mercy will soon pardon the meanest: but <a href='#FN181'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>mighty men shall be mightily tormented. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_7">7&#160;</span>For he which is Lord over all <a href='#FN182'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>shall fear no man’s person, neither shall he stand in awe of any man’s greatness: for he hath made the small and great, and <a href='#FN183'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>careth for all alike. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_8">8&#160;</span>But a sore trial shall come upon the mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_9">9&#160;</span>Unto you therefore, O kings, do I speak, that ye may learn wisdom, and not <a href='#FN184'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>fall away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_10">10&#160;</span>For they that keep holiness holily shall be <a href='#FN185'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>judged holy: and they that have learned such things shall find <a href='#FN186'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>what to answer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_11">11&#160;</span>Wherefore set your affection upon my words; desire them, and ye shall be instructed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_12">12&#160;</span>Wisdom is glorious, and never fadeth away: yea, <a href='#FN187'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_13">13&#160;</span>She <a href='#FN188'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>preventeth them that desire her, in making herself first known unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_14">14&#160;</span>Whoso <a href='#FN189'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>seeketh her early shall have no great travail: for he shall find her sitting at his doors. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_15">15&#160;</span>To think therefore upon her is perfection of wisdom: and whoso watcheth for her shall quickly be <a href='#FN190'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>without care. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_16">16&#160;</span>For she goeth about seeking such as are worthy of her, sheweth herself favourably unto them in the ways, and meeteth them in every thought. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_17">17&#160;</span>For the very true beginning of her is the desire of <a href='#FN191'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>discipline; and the care of <a href='#FN192'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>discipline is love; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_18">18&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN193'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>love is the keeping of her laws; and the giving heed unto her laws is the assurance of incorruption; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_19">19&#160;</span>And incorruption maketh us near unto God: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore the desire of wisdom bringeth to <a href='#FN194'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>a kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_21">21&#160;</span>If your delight be then in <a href='#FN195'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>thrones and sceptres, O ye kings of the people, honour wisdom, <a href='#FN196'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>that ye may reign for evermore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_22">22&#160;</span>As for wisdom, what she is, and how she came up, I will tell you, and will not hide mysteries from you: but will seek her out from the beginning of her nativity, and bring the knowledge of her into light, and will not pass over the truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_23">23&#160;</span>Neither <a href='#FN197'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>will I go with consuming envy; for such a man shall have no fellowship with wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_24">24&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN198'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the multitude of the wise is the welfare of the world: and a wise king is the upholding of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_25">25&#160;</span>Receive therefore instruction through my words, and it shall do you good.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_1">1&#160;</span>I myself also am a mortal man, like to all, and the offspring <a href='#FN199'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>of him that was first made of the earth, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_2">2&#160;</span>And in my mother’s womb was fashioned to be flesh in the time of ten months, <a href='#FN200'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>being compacted in blood, of the seed of man, and the pleasure that came with <a href='#FN201'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>sleep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_3">3&#160;</span>And when I was born, I drew in the common air, and fell upon the earth, which is <a href='#FN202'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>of like nature, and the first voice which I uttered was crying, as all others do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_4">4&#160;</span>I was nursed in <a href='#FN203'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>swaddling clothes, and that with cares. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_5">5&#160;</span>For there is no king that had any other beginning of birth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_6">6&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN204'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>all men have one entrance into life, and the like <a href='#FN205'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>going out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_7">7&#160;</span>Wherefore <a href='#FN206'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>I prayed, and understanding was given me: I <a href='#FN207'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>called upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_8">8&#160;</span>I preferred her before <a href='#FN208'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>sceptres and thrones, and <a href='#FN209'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>esteemed riches nothing in comparison of her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_9">9&#160;</span>Neither compared I unto her any <a href='#FN210'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN211'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>precious stone, because all gold in respect of her is as a little sand, and silver shall be counted as clay before her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_10">10&#160;</span>I loved her above <a href='#FN212'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>health and beauty, and chose to have her <a href='#FN213'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>instead of light: for the light that cometh from her never goeth out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN214' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>All good things together came to me with her, and <a href='#FN215'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>innumerable riches in her hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_12">12&#160;</span>And I rejoiced in them all, because wisdom goeth before them: and I knew not that she was the mother of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_13">13&#160;</span>I learned <a href='#FN216'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>diligently, and do communicate her <a href='#FN217'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>liberally: <a href='#FN218'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>I do not hide her riches. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_14">14&#160;</span>For she is <a href='#FN219'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>a treasure unto men that never faileth: which they that use <a href='#FN220'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN221'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>qq</a>become the friends of God, being <a href='#FN222'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>commended for the gifts that come from <a href='#FN223'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>rr</a>learning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN224' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>God hath granted me to speak as I would, and to conceive as is meet for the things that <a href='#FN225'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>are given me: because it is he that leadeth unto wisdom, and directeth the wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_16">16&#160;</span>For in his hand are both we and our words; all wisdom also, and knowledge of workmanship. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_17">17&#160;</span>For he hath given me certain knowledge of the things that are, namely, to know how the world was made, and the operation of the elements: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_18">18&#160;</span>The beginning, ending, and midst of the times: the alterations of <a href='#FN226'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>the turning of the sun, and the change of seasons: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_19">19&#160;</span>The circuits of years, and the <a href='#FN227'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>positions of stars: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_20">20&#160;</span>The natures of living creatures, and the furies of wild beasts: the violence of winds, and the <a href='#FN228'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>reasonings of men: the diversities of plants and the virtues of roots: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_21">21&#160;</span>And all such things as are either secret or manifest, them I know. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_22">22&#160;</span>For wisdom, which is <a href='#FN229'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>the worker of all things, taught me: for in her is an understanding spirit holy, <a href='#FN230'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>one only, manifold, subtil, lively, <a href='#FN231'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>clear, undefiled, plain, not subject to hurt, <a href='#FN232'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>loving the thing that is good quick, which cannot be letted, ready to do good, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_23">23&#160;</span>Kind to man, steadfast, sure, <a href='#FN233'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>free from care, having all power, overseeing all things, and going through all understanding, pure, and most subtil, spirits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_24">24&#160;</span>For wisdom is more moving than any motion: she passeth and goeth through all things by reason of her pureness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_25">25&#160;</span>For she is the <a href='#FN234'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>breath of the power of God, and a pure <a href='#FN235'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>influence flowing from the glory of the <a href='#FN236'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>Almighty: therefore can no defiled thing fall into her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_26">26&#160;</span>For she is <a href='#FN237'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted <a href='#FN238'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>mirror of the power of God, and <a href='#FN239'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the image of his goodness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_27">27&#160;</span>And being but one, she can do all things: and remaining in herself, she <a href='#FN240'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>maketh all things new: and in all ages entering into holy souls, she maketh them <a href='#FN241'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>friends of God, and <a href='#FN242'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>prophets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_28">28&#160;</span>For God loveth none but him that dwelleth with wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_29">29&#160;</span>For she is more beautiful than the sun, and above all the <a href='#FN243'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>order of stars: being compared with the light, she is found before it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_30">30&#160;</span>For after this cometh night: but vice shall not prevail against wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_1">1&#160;</span>Wisdom reacheth from one end to another mightily: and <a href='#FN244'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sweetly doth she order all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_2">2&#160;</span>I loved her, and sought her out from my youth, I desired <a href='#FN245'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN246'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>to make her my spouse, and I was a lover of her beauty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_3">3&#160;</span>In that she is <a href='#FN247'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>conversant with God, she magnifieth her nobility: yea, the Lord of all things himself loved her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_4">4&#160;</span>For she is <a href='#FN248'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>privy to the mysteries of the knowledge of God, and a <a href='#FN249'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>lover of his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_5">5&#160;</span>If riches be a possession to be desired in this life; <a href='#FN250'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>what is richer than wisdom, <a href='#FN251'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that worketh all things? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_6">6&#160;</span>And if <a href='#FN252'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>prudence work; who of all that are is a more cunning workman than she? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_7">7&#160;</span>And if a man love righteousness her labours are virtues: for she teacheth temperance and prudence, justice and <a href='#FN253'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>fortitude: which are such things, as men can have nothing more profitable in their life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_8">8&#160;</span>If a man desire much experience, she knoweth things of old, and conjectureth aright what is to come: she knoweth the subtilties of speeches, and can expound <a href='#FN254'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>dark sentences: she foreseeth signs and wonders, and the <a href='#FN255'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>events of seasons and times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore I purposed <a href='#FN256'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>to take her to me <a href='#FN257'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>to live with me, knowing that she <a href='#FN258'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>would be a counsellor of good things, and a comfort in cares and grief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_10">10&#160;</span>For her sake I shall have estimation among the multitude, and honour with the elders, <a href='#FN259'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>though I be young. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_11">11&#160;</span>I shall be found of a quick conceit <a href='#FN260'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>in judgment, and shall be admired in the sight of <a href='#FN261'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>great men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN262' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>When I hold my tongue, they shall bide my leisure, and when I speak, they shall give good ear unto me: if I talk much, they shall <a href='#FN263'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>lay their hands upon their mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_13">13&#160;</span>Moreover <a href='#FN264'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>by the means of her I shall obtain immortality, and leave behind me an everlasting memorial to them that come after me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_14">14&#160;</span>I shall <a href='#FN265'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>set the people in order, and <a href='#FN266'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the nations shall be subject unto me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_15">15&#160;</span>Horrible tyrants shall be afraid, when they do but hear of me; I shall <a href='#FN267'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>be found good among the multitude, and <a href='#FN268'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>valiant in war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN269' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>After I am come into mine house, I will repose myself with her: for her conversation hath no bitterness; and <a href='#FN270'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>to live with her hath no sorrow, but mirth and joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_17">17&#160;</span>Now when I considered these things in myself, and <a href='#FN271'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>pondered them in my heart, how that to be allied unto wisdom <a href='#FN272'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>is immortality; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_18">18&#160;</span>And great pleasure it is to have her friendship; and in the works of her hands are infinite riches; and in the exercise of conference with her, prudence; and in talking with her, a <a href='#FN273'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>good report; I went about seeking how to <a href='#FN274'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>take her to me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_19">19&#160;</span>For I was a witty child, and had a good spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_20">20&#160;</span>Yea rather, being good, <a href='#FN275'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>I came into a body undefiled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_21">21&#160;</span>Nevertheless, when I perceived that I could not otherwise <a href='#FN276'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>obtain her, except God gave her me; and that was a point of wisdom also to know whose gift she was; I <a href='#FN277'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN278'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>prayed unto the Lord, and besought him, and with my whole heart I said,  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_1">1&#160;</span>O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, <a href='#FN279'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>who hast made all things with thy word, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_2">2&#160;</span>And ordained man through thy wisdom, that he should <a href='#FN280'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>have dominion over the creatures which thou hast made, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_3">3&#160;</span>And order the world according to <a href='#FN281'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>equity and righteousness, and execute judgment with an upright heart: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN282' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>Give me wisdom, <a href='#FN283'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>that sitteth by thy throne; and reject me not from among thy children: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_5">5&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN284'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>I thy servant and son of thine handmaid am a feeble person, and of a short time, and <a href='#FN285'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>too young for the understanding of judgment and laws. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_6">6&#160;</span>For though a man be never so perfect among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, <a href='#FN286'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>he shall be nothing regarded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN287' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>Thou hast chosen me to be a king of thy people, and a judge of thy sons and daughters: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_8">8&#160;</span><a href='#FN288' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Thou hast commanded me to build a temple upon <a href='#FN289'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>thy holy mount, and an altar in the city wherein thou dwellest, <a href='#FN290'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>a resemblance of the holy tabernacle, <a href='#FN291'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>which thou hast prepared from the beginning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_9">9&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN292'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a><a href='#FN293'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>wisdom was with thee: which knoweth thy works, and was present when thou madest the world, and knew what was acceptable in thy sight, and right in thy commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_10">10&#160;</span>O send her out of thy <a href='#FN294'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>holy heavens, and from the throne of thy glory, that being present she may labour with me, that I may know what is pleasing unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_11">11&#160;</span>For she knoweth and understandeth all things, and she shall lead me soberly in my doings, and preserve me <a href='#FN295'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in her power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_12">12&#160;</span>So shall my works be acceptable, and then shall I judge thy people righteously, and be worthy to sit in my father’s seat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN296' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>For what man is he that can know the counsel of God? or who can think what the will of the Lord is? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_14">14&#160;</span>For the thoughts of mortal men are <a href='#FN297'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>miserable, and our devices are but uncertain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_15">15&#160;</span>For the corruptible body presseth down the soul, and <a href='#FN298'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>the <a href='#FN299'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>earthy tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_16">16&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN300'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon earth, and with labour do we find the things that are <a href='#FN301'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>before us: but the things that are in heaven who hath searched out? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_17">17&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN302'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>thy counsel who hath known, <a href='#FN303'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>except thou give wisdom, and <a href='#FN304'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>send thy Holy Spirit from above? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_18">18&#160;</span>For so the ways of them which lived on the earth were reformed, and men were taught the things that are pleasing unto thee, and <a href='#FN305'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>were saved through wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_1">1&#160;</span>She preserved the <a href='#FN306'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>first formed father of the world, that was created alone, and brought him out of his fall, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_2">2&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN307'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>gave him power to rule all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_3">3&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN308'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>when the unrighteous went away from her in his anger, <a href='#FN309'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>he perished also in the fury wherewith he murdered his brother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_4">4&#160;</span>For whose cause <a href='#FN310'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the earth being drowned with the flood, <a href='#FN311'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>wisdom again preserved it, and directed the course of <a href='#FN312'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the righteous <a href='#FN313'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>in a piece of wood of small value. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover, <a href='#FN314'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the nations in their wicked conspiracy being confounded, <a href='#FN315'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>she found out the righteous, and preserved him <a href='#FN316'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>blameless unto God, and <a href='#FN317'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>kept him strong <a href='#FN318'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>against his tender compassion toward his son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN319' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>When the ungodly perished, she delivered <a href='#FN320'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the righteous man, who fled from the fire which fell down upon <a href='#FN321'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>the <a href='#FN322'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>five cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_7">7&#160;</span>Of whose wickedness even to this day the waste land that smoketh is a testimony, and plants bearing fruit that never come to ripeness: and <a href='#FN323'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>a standing pillar of salt is a monument of an unbelieving soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_8">8&#160;</span>For regarding not wisdom, they gat not only this hurt, that they knew not the things which were good; but also left behind them to the world a memorial of their foolishness: so that in the things wherein they offended they could not so much as be hid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_9">9&#160;</span>But wisdom delivered from pain those that attended upon her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_10">10&#160;</span>When <a href='#FN324'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the righteous fled from his brother’s wrath she guided him in right paths, <a href='#FN325'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>shewed him the kingdom of God, and gave him knowledge of holy things, <a href='#FN326'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>made him rich in his travels, and multiplied the fruit of his labours. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN327' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>In the covetousness of such as oppressed him she stood by him, and made him rich. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN328' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>She defended him from his enemies, and kept him safe from those that lay in wait, and <a href='#FN329'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>in a sore conflict she gave him the victory; that he might know that goodness is stronger than all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN330' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>When the righteous was sold, she forsook him not, but <a href='#FN331'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>delivered him from sin: <a href='#FN332'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>she went down with him into the pit, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_14">14&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN333'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>left him not in bonds, till she brought him the sceptre of the kingdom, and <a href='#FN334'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN335'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>power against those that oppressed him: as for <a href='#FN336'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>them that had accused him, she shewed them to be liars, and gave him perpetual glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN337' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>She delivered the <a href='#FN338'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>righteous people and <a href='#FN339'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>blameless seed from the nation that oppressed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_16">16&#160;</span><a href='#FN340' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>She entered into the soul of <a href='#FN341'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the servant of the Lord, and <a href='#FN342'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>withstood dreadful kings <a href='#FN343'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>in wonders and signs; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN344' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Rendered to the <a href='#FN345'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>righteous a reward of their labours, guided them in a marvellous way, and was unto them for <a href='#FN346'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>a cover by day, and <a href='#FN347'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>a <a href='#FN348'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>light of stars in the night season; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN349' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Brought them through the Red sea, and led them through much water: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_19">19&#160;</span><a href='#FN350' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>But she drowned their enemies, and <a href='#FN351'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>cast them up out of the bottom of the deep. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN352'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the righteous spoiled the ungodly, and <a href='#FN353'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>praised thy holy name, O Lord, and magnified with one accord thine hand, that fought for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_21">21&#160;</span>For wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb, and made the tongues of them that cannot speak <a href='#FN354'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>eloquent.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_1">1&#160;</span>She prospered their works in the hand of the holy <a href='#FN355'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>prophet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN356' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>They went through the wilderness that was not inhabited, and pitched tents in places where there lay no way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN357' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>They stood against their enemies, and were avenged of their adversaries. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_4">4&#160;</span>When they were thirsty, they called upon thee, and <a href='#FN358'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>water was given them out of the flinty rock, and their thirst was quenched out of the hard stone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_5">5&#160;</span>For by what things their enemies were punished, by the same they in their need were benefited. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_6">6&#160;</span>For instead of a perpetual running river <a href='#FN359'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>troubled with foul blood, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_7">7&#160;</span>For a manifest reproof of <a href='#FN360'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>that commandment, whereby the infants were slain, thou gavest unto them abundance of water <a href='#FN361'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>by a means which they hoped not for: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_8">8&#160;</span>Declaring by that thirst then <a href='#FN362'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>how thou hadst punished their adversaries. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_9">9&#160;</span>For when they were tried albeit but in mercy chastised, they knew how the ungodly were judged in wrath and tormented, <a href='#FN363'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>thirsting in another manner than the just. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_10">10&#160;</span>For these thou didst admonish and try, <a href='#FN364'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>as a father: but the other, as a severe king, thou didst condemn and punish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_11">11&#160;</span>Whether they were absent or present, they were vexed alike. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_12">12&#160;</span>For a double grief came upon them, and a groaning for the remembrance of things past. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_13">13&#160;</span>For when they heard by their own punishments the other to be benefited, <a href='#FN365'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>they <a href='#FN366'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>had some feeling of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_14">14&#160;</span>For whom they respected with scorn, <a href='#FN367'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>when he was long before thrown out at the casting forth of the infants, him in the end, <a href='#FN368'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>when they saw what came to pass, they admired. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_15">15&#160;</span>But for the foolish devices of their wickedness, wherewith being deceived they worshipped <a href='#FN369'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>serpents void of reason, and <a href='#FN370'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>vile beasts, <a href='#FN371'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>thou didst send a multitude of unreasonable beasts upon them for vengeance; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_16">16&#160;</span>That they might know, that <a href='#FN372'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>wherewithal a man sinneth, by the same also shall he be punished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_17">17&#160;</span>For thy Almighty hand, that made the world <a href='#FN373'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>of matter without form, wanted not means <a href='#FN374'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>to send among them a multitude of bears or fierce lions, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_18">18&#160;</span>Or unknown wild beasts, <a href='#FN375'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>full of rage, newly created, breathing out either a fiery vapour, or filthy scents of scattered smoke, or shooting horrible sparkles out of their eyes: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_19">19&#160;</span>Whereof not only the harm might dispatch them at once, but also the terrible sight utterly destroy them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_20">20&#160;</span>Yea, and without these might they have fallen down with one blast, being persecuted of <a href='#FN376'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>vengeance, and scattered abroad through <a href='#FN377'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>the breath of thy power: but thou hast ordered all things in <a href='#FN378'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>measure and <a href='#FN379'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>ww</a>number and weight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_21">21&#160;</span>For thou canst shew thy great strength at all times when thou wilt; and <a href='#FN380'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>who may withstand the power of thine arm? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_22">22&#160;</span>For the whole world before thee is as a <a href='#FN381'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>little grain of the balance, yea, <a href='#FN382'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>as a drop of the morning dew that falleth down upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_23">23&#160;</span>But thou hast mercy upon all; for thou canst do all things, and <a href='#FN383'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>winkest at the sins of men, because they should amend. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_24">24&#160;</span>For thou lovest all the things that are, and abhorrest nothing which thou hast made: for never wouldest thou have made any thing, if thou hadst hated it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_25">25&#160;</span>And how could any thing have endured, if it had not been thy will? or been preserved, if not <a href='#FN384'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>called by thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_26">26&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN385'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>thou sparest all: for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of souls.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_1">1&#160;</span>For thine incorruptible Spirit is in all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore chastenest thou them by little and little that <a href='#FN386'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>offend, and warnest them by putting them in remembrance wherein they have offended, that leaving their wickedness they may believe on thee, O Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_3">3&#160;</span>For it was thy will to destroy by the hands of our fathers both those <a href='#FN387'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>old inhabitants of thy holy land, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_4">4&#160;</span>Whom <a href='#FN388'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>thou hatedst for doing most odious works of <a href='#FN389'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN390'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>witchcrafts, and wicked sacrifices; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_5">5&#160;</span>And also those <a href='#FN391'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>merciless murderers of children, and devourers of man’s flesh, and the feasts of blood, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_6">6&#160;</span>With their priests out of the midst of their idolatrous crew, and <a href='#FN392'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the parents, that killed with their own hands souls destitute of help: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_7">7&#160;</span>That the land, which thou esteemedst above all other, might receive a worthy <a href='#FN393'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>colony of God’s children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_8">8&#160;</span>Nevertheless even those <a href='#FN394'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>thou sparedst as men, and didst send <a href='#FN395'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>wasps, forerunners of thine host, to destroy them by little and little. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_9">9&#160;</span>Not that thou wast unable to bring the ungodly under the hand of the righteous in battle, or to destroy them at once with cruel beasts, or with one rough word: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_10">10&#160;</span>But executing thy judgments upon them <a href='#FN396'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>by little and little, thou gavest them place of repentance, not being ignorant that they were a naughty generation, and that their malice was bred in them, and that their cogitation would never be changed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_11">11&#160;</span>For it was <a href='#FN397'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>a cursed seed from the beginning; neither didst thou for fear of any man give them pardon for those things wherein they sinned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN398' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>For who shall say, <a href='#FN399'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>What hast thou done? or who shall withstand thy judgment? or who shall <a href='#FN400'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>accuse thee for the nations that perish, whom thou made? or who shall come <a href='#FN401'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to stand against thee, <a href='#FN402'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>to be revenged for the unrighteous men? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_13">13&#160;</span>For neither is there any God but thou that <a href='#FN403'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>careth for all, to whom thou mightest shew that thy judgment is not unright. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_14">14&#160;</span>Neither shall king or tyrant be able <a href='#FN404'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>to set his face against thee for any whom thou hast punished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_15">15&#160;</span>Forsomuch then as thou art righteous thyself, thou orderest all things righteously: <a href='#FN405'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>thinking it not agreeable with thy power to condemn him that hath not deserved to be punished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_16">16&#160;</span>For thy power is the beginning of righteousness, and because thou art the Lord of all, <a href='#FN406'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>it maketh thee to be gracious unto all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_17">17&#160;</span>For when men will not believe that thou art of a <a href='#FN407'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>full power, thou shewest thy strength, and among them that know it thou makest their boldness manifest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_18">18&#160;</span>But thou, mastering thy power, judgest with <a href='#FN408'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>equity, and orderest us <a href='#FN409'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>with great favour: for <a href='#FN410'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>thou mayest use power when thou wilt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_19">19&#160;</span>But by such works hast thou taught thy people that the just man should be merciful, and hast made thy children to be of a good hope that thou givest repentance for sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN411' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>For if thou didst punish the enemies of thy children, and the condemned to death, with such deliberation, giving them <a href='#FN412'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>time and place, whereby they might be delivered from their malice: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_21">21&#160;</span>With how great <a href='#FN413'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>circumspection didst thou judge thine own sons, <a href='#FN414'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>unto whose fathers thou hast sworn, and made covenants of good promises? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_22">22&#160;</span>Therefore, whereas thou dost chasten us, thou scourgest our enemies a thousand times more, to the intent that, <a href='#FN415'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>when we judge, we should carefully think of thy goodness, and when we ourselves are judged, we should look for mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_23">23&#160;</span>Wherefore, whereas men have lived dissolutely and unrighteously, <a href='#FN416'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>thou hast tormented them with their own <a href='#FN417'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN418'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>abominations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_24">24&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN419'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>they went astray very far in the ways of error, and <a href='#FN420'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>held them for gods, which even among the beasts of their enemies were despised, being deceived, as children of no understanding. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore unto them, as to children without the use of reason, thou didst send a judgment to mock them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_26">26&#160;</span>But they that would not be reformed by that correction, <a href='#FN421'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>wherein he dallied with them, shall feel a judgment worthy of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_27">27&#160;</span>For, look, for what things they grudged, when they were punished, that is, for them whom they thought to be gods; <span class='add'>now</span> <a href='#FN422'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>being punished in them, when they saw it, they acknowledged him to be the true God, whom before they denied to know: and <a href='#FN423'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>therefore came extreme damnation upon them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN424' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Surely vain are all men by nature, who are ignorant of God, and could not out of the good things that are seen know him that is: neither by considering the works did they acknowledge the <a href='#FN425'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>workmaster; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_2">2&#160;</span>But deemed either fire, or wind, or the swift air, or <a href='#FN426'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the circle of the stars, or the violent water, or <a href='#FN427'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the lights of heaven, to be the gods which govern the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_3">3&#160;</span>With whose beauty if they being delighted <a href='#FN428'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>took them to be gods; let them know how much better the Lord of them is: for the first author of beauty hath created them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_4">4&#160;</span>But if they were astonished at their power and virtue, let them understand by them, how much mightier he is that made them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_5">5&#160;</span><a href='#FN429' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>For by the greatness and beauty of the creatures proportionably the maker of them is seen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_6">6&#160;</span>But yet for this they are the less to be blamed: for they peradventure err, seeking God, and desirous to find him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN430' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>For being conversant in his works they <a href='#FN431'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>search him diligently, and believe their sight: because the things are beautiful that are seen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_8">8&#160;</span>Howbeit neither are they to be pardoned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_9">9&#160;</span>For if they were able to know so much, that they could aim at the world; how did they not sooner find out the Lord thereof? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_10">10&#160;</span>But miserable are they, and in <a href='#FN432'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>dead things is their hope, who call them gods, which are <a href='#FN433'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the works of men’s hands, gold and silver, <a href='#FN434'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>to shew art in, and resemblances of beasts, or a stone good for nothing, the work of an ancient hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN435' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>Now a <a href='#FN436'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>carpenter that felleth timber, after he hath sawn down a tree meet for the purpose, and taken off all the bark skilfully round about, and hath wrought it handsomely, and made <a href='#FN437'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>a vessel thereof fit for the service of man’s life; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_12">12&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN438'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>after spending the <a href='#FN439'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN440'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>refuse of his work to dress his meat, hath filled himself; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_13">13&#160;</span>And taking the very <a href='#FN441'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>refuse among those which served to no use, being a crooked piece of wood, and full of knots, hath carved it diligently, when he had nothing else to do, and formed it by the skill of his understanding, and fashioned it to the image of a man; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_14">14&#160;</span>Or made it like some <a href='#FN442'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>vile beast, laying it over with vermilion, and with paint colouring it red, and covering every spot therein; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_15">15&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN443'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>when he had made a convenient room for it, set it in a wall, and made it fast with iron: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_16">16&#160;</span>For he provided for it that it might not fall, knowing that it was unable to help itself; for it is an image, and hath need of help: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN444' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Then maketh he prayer for his goods, for his wife and children, and is not ashamed to speak to that which hath no life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_18">18&#160;</span>For health he calleth upon that which is weak: for life prayeth to that which is <a href='#FN445'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>dead; for <a href='#FN446'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>aid humbly beseecheth <a href='#FN447'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that which hath least means to help: and for a good journey he asketh of <a href='#FN448'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>that which cannot set a foot forward: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_19">19&#160;</span>And for gaining and getting, and for good success of his hands, asketh ability to do of him, that is most unable to do any thing.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_1">1&#160;</span>Again, one preparing himself to sail, and about to pass through the raging waves, calleth upon a piece of wood more rotten than the <a href='#FN449'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>vessel that carrieth him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_2">2&#160;</span>For verily desire of gain devised <a href='#FN450'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that, and the workman built it by his skill. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_3">3&#160;</span>But thy providence, O Father, governeth it: for thou <a href='#FN451'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>hast made a way in the sea, and a safe path in the waves; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_4">4&#160;</span>Shewing that thou canst save from all danger: yea, though a man went to sea without art. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_5">5&#160;</span>Nevertheless thou wouldest not that the works of thy wisdom should be idle, and therefore do men commit their lives to a small piece of wood, and passing the rough sea <a href='#FN452'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>in a weak vessel are saved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_6">6&#160;</span>For in the old time also, <a href='#FN453'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>when the proud giants perished, the hope of the world governed by thy hand escaped in a weak vessel, and left to all ages a seed of generation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_7">7&#160;</span>For blessed is <a href='#FN454'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the wood whereby righteousness cometh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_8">8&#160;</span>But that which is made with hands is cursed, <a href='#FN455'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>as well it, as he that made it: he, because he made it; and it, because, being corruptible, it was called god. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_9">9&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN456'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the ungodly and his ungodliness are both alike hateful unto God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_10">10&#160;</span>For that which is made shall be punished together with him that made it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN457'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>even <a href='#FN458'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>upon the idols of the Gentiles shall there be a <a href='#FN459'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>visitation: because in the creature of God they are become an abomination, and <a href='#FN460'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN461'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>stumblingblocks to the souls of men, and a <a href='#FN462'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN463'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>snare to the feet of the unwise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN464' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>For the <a href='#FN465'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>devising of idols was the beginning of spiritual fornication, and the invention of them the corruption of life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_13">13&#160;</span>For neither were they from the beginning, neither shall they be for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_14">14&#160;</span>For by the vain glory of men they entered into the world, and therefore shall they come shortly to an end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_15">15&#160;</span>For a father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he hath made an image of his child soon taken away, now honoured him as a god, which was then a dead man, and delivered to those that were under him <a href='#FN466'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>ceremonies and <a href='#FN467'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>sacrifices. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_16">16&#160;</span>Thus <a href='#FN468'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in process of time an ungodly custom grown strong was kept as a law, and graven images were worshipped by the commandments of <a href='#FN469'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_17">17&#160;</span>Whom men could not honour <a href='#FN470'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in presence, because they dwelt far off, they took the counterfeit of his visage from far, and made an express image of a king whom they honoured, to the end that by this their <a href='#FN471'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>forwardness they might flatter him that was absent, as if he were present. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_18">18&#160;</span>Also the singular diligence of the artificer did help to set forward the ignorant to more <a href='#FN472'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>superstition. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_19">19&#160;</span>For he, peradventure willing to please one in authority, forced all his skill to make the resemblance <a href='#FN473'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of the best fashion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_20">20&#160;</span>And so the multitude, allured by the grace of the work, took him now for a <a href='#FN474'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>god, which a little before was but honoured. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_21">21&#160;</span>And this was <a href='#FN475'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>an occasion to deceive the world: for men, serving either calamity or tyranny, did ascribe unto stones and stocks <a href='#FN476'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the incommunicable <a href='#FN477'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_22">22&#160;</span>Moreover this was not enough for them, that they erred in the knowledge of God; but whereas they lived in the great war of ignorance, those so great plagues called they peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_23">23&#160;</span>For whilst <a href='#FN478'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>they slew their children in <a href='#FN479'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>sacrifices, or used secret <a href='#FN480'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>ceremonies, or made <a href='#FN481'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>revellings of strange rites; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_24">24&#160;</span>They kept neither lives nor marriages any longer undefiled: but either one slew another traiterously, or grieved him by adultery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_25">25&#160;</span><a href='#FN482' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>So that there reigned in all men <a href='#FN483'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>without exception blood, manslaughter, theft, and dissimulation, corruption, unfaithfulness, tumults, perjury, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_26">26&#160;</span>Disquieting of good men, <a href='#FN484'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>forgetfulness of good turns, defiling of souls, changing of <a href='#FN485'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>kind, disorder in marriages, <a href='#FN486'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>adultery, and <a href='#FN487'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>shameless uncleanness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_27">27&#160;</span><a href='#FN488' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>For the <a href='#FN489'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>worshipping of idols <a href='#FN490'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>not to be named is the beginning, the cause, and the end, of all evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_28">28&#160;</span>For either they are mad when they be merry, or <a href='#FN491'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>prophesy lies, or live unjustly, or else lightly forswear themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_29">29&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN492'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>insomuch as their trust is in idols, which have no life; though they swear falsely, yet they look not to be hurt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_30">30&#160;</span>Howbeit for both causes shall they be justly punished: both because they thought not well of God, <a href='#FN493'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>giving heed unto idols, and also unjustly swore in deceit, despising holiness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_31">31&#160;</span>For it is not the power of them by whom they swear: but it is the just vengeance of sinners, that punisheth always the offence of the ungodly.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_1">1&#160;</span>But thou, O God, art gracious and true, longsuffering, and in mercy ordering all things, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_2">2&#160;</span>For if we sin, we are thine, knowing thy power: but we will not sin, knowing that we are counted thine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_3">3&#160;</span>For to know thee is perfect righteousness: yea, to know thy power is <a href='#FN494'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>the root of immortality. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_4">4&#160;</span>For neither did the mischievous <a href='#FN495'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>invention of men deceive us, nor an image spotted with divers colours, the painter’s fruitless labour; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_5">5&#160;</span>The sight whereof <a href='#FN496'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>enticeth fools to lust after it, and so they desire the form of a dead image, that hath no breath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_6">6&#160;</span>Both they that make them, they that desire them, and they that worship them, are lovers of evil things, and are worthy to have such things to trust upon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_7">7&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN497'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the potter, tempering soft earth, fashioneth every vessel with much labour for our service: yea, <a href='#FN498'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>of the same clay he maketh both the vessels that serve for clean uses, and likewise also all such as serve to the contrary: but what is the use of either sort, the potter himself is the judge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_8">8&#160;</span>And employing his labours lewdly, he maketh a vain god of the same clay, even he which a little before was made of earth himself, and within a little while after returneth to the same, <a href='#FN499'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>out of which he was taken, <a href='#FN500'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>when his life which was lent him shall be demanded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_9">9&#160;</span>Notwithstanding his care is, not that he shall <a href='#FN501'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>have much labour, nor that his life is short: but striveth to excel goldsmiths and silversmiths, and endeavoureth to do like the workers in brass, and counteth it his glory to make counterfeit things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_10">10&#160;</span><a href='#FN502' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>His heart is ashes, his hope is more vile than earth, and his life of less value than clay: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_11">11&#160;</span>Forasmuch as he knew not his Maker, and him that inspired into him an active soul, and <a href='#FN503'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>breathed in a living spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_12">12&#160;</span>But they counted our life <a href='#FN504'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>a pastime, and our <a href='#FN505'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>time here a market for gain: for, say they, we must be getting every way, though it be by evil means. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN506' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>For this man, <a href='#FN507'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>that of earthly matter maketh brittle vessels and graven images, knoweth himself to offend above all others. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_14">14&#160;</span>And all the enemies of thy people, that hold them in subjection, are most foolish, and are more miserable than very babes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_15">15&#160;</span>For they counted all the idols of the heathen to be gods: <a href='#FN508'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>which neither have the use of eyes to see, nor noses to draw <a href='#FN509'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>breath, nor ears to hear, nor fingers of hands to handle; and as for their feet, they are slow to go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_16">16&#160;</span>For man made them, and <a href='#FN510'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>he that borrowed his own spirit fashioned them: but no man can make a god like unto himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_17">17&#160;</span>For being mortal, he worketh <a href='#FN511'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>a dead thing with wicked hands: for he himself is better than <a href='#FN512'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>the things which he worshippeth: whereas he lived once, but they never. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_18">18&#160;</span>Yea, <a href='#FN513'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>they worshipped those beasts also that are most hateful: for being compared together, some are worse than others. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_19">19&#160;</span>Neither are they beautiful, so much as to be desired <a href='#FN514'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>in respect of beasts: but <a href='#FN515'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>they went without the praise of God and his blessing.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_1">1&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN516'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>by the like were they punished worthily, and by the multitude of beasts tormented. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_2">2&#160;</span>Instead of which punishment, <a href='#FN517'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>aa</a>dealing graciously with thine own people, thou preparedst for them meat of a strange taste, even <a href='#FN518'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>quails to stir up their appetite: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_3">3&#160;</span>To the end that they, desiring food, might <a href='#FN519'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>for the ugly sight of the beasts sent among them lothe even that, which they must needs desire; but these, suffering penury <a href='#FN520'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>for a short space, might be made partakers of a strange taste. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_4">4&#160;</span>For it was requisite, that upon them exercising tyranny should come penury, <a href='#FN521'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>which they could not avoid: but to these it should only be shewed how their enemies were tormented. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_5">5&#160;</span>For when <a href='#FN522'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the horrible fierceness of beasts came upon <a href='#FN523'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>these, and <a href='#FN524'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>they perished with the stings of crooked serpents, thy wrath endured not for ever: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_6">6&#160;</span>But they were troubled <a href='#FN525'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>for a small season, that they might be admonished, <a href='#FN526'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>having a sign of salvation, <a href='#FN527'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>to put them in remembrance of the commandment of thy law. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_7">7&#160;</span>For he that turned himself toward it was not saved by the thing that he saw, <a href='#FN528'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>but by thee, that art <a href='#FN529'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the Saviour of all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_8">8&#160;</span>And in this thou madest thine enemies confess, that it is thou who deliverest from all evil: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_9">9&#160;</span>For them the bitings of <a href='#FN530'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>grasshoppers and <a href='#FN531'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>flies killed, neither was there found any remedy for their life: <a href='#FN532'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>for they were worthy to be punished by such. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_10">10&#160;</span>But thy sons not the very teeth of venomous dragons overcame: for thy mercy was ever by them, and healed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_11">11&#160;</span>For they were <a href='#FN533'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>pricked, <a href='#FN534'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>that they should remember thy words; and were <a href='#FN535'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>quickly saved, that not falling into deep forgetfulness, they might be <a href='#FN536'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>continually mindful of thy goodness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_12">12&#160;</span>For it was neither herb, nor <a href='#FN537'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>mollifying plaister, that restored them to health: but <a href='#FN538'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>thy word, O Lord, which healeth all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_13">13&#160;</span><a href='#FN539' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>For thou hast power of life and death: <a href='#FN540'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>thou leadest to the gates of hell, and bringest up again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_14">14&#160;</span><a href='#FN541' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>A man indeed killeth through his malice: and <a href='#FN542'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the spirit, when it is gone forth, returneth not; neither the soul received up cometh again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN543' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>But it is not possible to escape thine hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_16">16&#160;</span>For the ungodly, <a href='#FN544'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>that denied to know thee, were scourged <a href='#FN545'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>v</a>by the strength of thine arm: <a href='#FN546'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>with strange rains, hails, and showers, were they persecuted, <a href='#FN547'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>that they could not avoid, and <a href='#FN548'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>through fire were they consumed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_17">17&#160;</span>For, which is most to be wondered at, <a href='#FN549'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>the fire had more force in the water, that quencheth all things: for <a href='#FN550'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>the world fighteth for the righteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_18">18&#160;</span>For sometime the flame was mitigated, that it might not burn up <a href='#FN551'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>the beasts that were sent against the ungodly; but themselves might see and perceive that they were persecuted with the judgment of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_19">19&#160;</span>And at another time it burneth even in the midst of water above the power of fire, that it might destroy the fruits of an unjust land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_20">20&#160;</span>Instead whereof <a href='#FN552'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>thou feddest thine own people with <a href='#FN553'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>angels’ food, and didst send them <a href='#FN554'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>from heaven bread prepared without their labour, able to content every man’s delight, and agreeing to every taste. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_21">21&#160;</span>For thy <a href='#FN555'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a><a href='#FN556'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>sustenance declared thy sweetness unto thy children, and serving to the appetite of the eater, <a href='#FN557'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>tempered itself to every man’s liking. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_22">22&#160;</span><a href='#FN558' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>But snow and <a href='#FN559'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>ice endured the fire, and melted not, that they might know <a href='#FN560'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a><a href='#FN561'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>that fire burning in the hail, and <a href='#FN562'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>sparkling in the rain, <a href='#FN563'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>did destroy the fruits of the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_23">23&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN564'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>this again did even forget his own strength, that <a href='#FN565'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the righteous might be nourished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_24">24&#160;</span><a href='#FN566' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>For the creature that serveth thee, who art the Maker increaseth his strength against the unrighteous for their punishment, and abateth his strength for the benefit of such as put their trust in thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore even then <a href='#FN567'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>was it altered into all <a href='#FN568'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fashions, and was obedient to thy grace, that nourisheth all things, according to the desire <a href='#FN569'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>of them that had need: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_26">26&#160;</span>That thy children, O Lord, <a href='#FN570'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>j</a>whom thou lovest, <a href='#FN571'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>might know, that it is not the growing of fruits that nourisheth man: but that it is thy word, which preserveth them that put their trust in thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_27">27&#160;</span>For that which was not destroyed of the fire, <a href='#FN572'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>being warmed with a little sunbeam, soon melted away: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_28">28&#160;</span>That it might be known, that <a href='#FN573'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>we must prevent the sun to give thee thanks, and at the dayspring <a href='#FN574'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>pray unto thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_29">29&#160;</span>For the hope of <a href='#FN575'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>the unthankful shall melt away as the winter’s hoar frost, and shall run away as unprofitable water.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_1">1&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN576'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>great are thy judgments, and cannot be expressed: therefore <a href='#FN577'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>unnurtured souls have erred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_2">2&#160;</span>For when unrighteous men thought to oppress the holy nation; <a href='#FN578'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>they being shut up <a href='#FN579'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in their houses, the prisoners of darkness, and fettered with the bonds of a long night, lay <span class='add'>there</span> <a href='#FN580'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>exiled from the eternal providence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_3">3&#160;</span>For while they supposed to lie hid in their secret sins, they were scattered <a href='#FN581'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>under a dark veil of forgetfulness, being horribly astonished, and troubled with <span class='add'>strange</span> <a href='#FN582'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>apparitions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_4">4&#160;</span>For neither might the corner that held them keep them from fear: but noises <span class='add'>as of waters</span> falling down sounded about them, and sad visions appeared unto them with heavy countenances. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_5">5&#160;</span>No power of the fire might give them light: neither could the bright flames of the stars endure to lighten that horrible night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_6">6&#160;</span>Only there appeared unto them a fire kindled of itself, very dreadful: for being much terrified, <a href='#FN583'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>they thought the things which they saw to be worse than the sight they saw not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_7">7&#160;</span>As for <a href='#FN584'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>the illusions of art magick, they were put down, and <a href='#FN585'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>their vaunting in wisdom was reproved with disgrace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_8">8&#160;</span>For they, that promised to drive away terrors and troubles from a sick soul, were sick themselves of <a href='#FN586'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>fear, worthy to be laughed at. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_9">9&#160;</span>For though no terrible thing did fear them; yet being scared with beasts that passed by, and hissing of <a href='#FN587'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>serpents, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_10">10&#160;</span>They died for fear, <a href='#FN588'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>denying that they saw the air, <a href='#FN589'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>which could of no side be avoided. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_11">11&#160;</span>For wickedness, condemned by her own witness, is very timorous, and being pressed with conscience, <a href='#FN590'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>always forecasteth grievous things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_12">12&#160;</span>For fear is nothing else but a betraying of the succours which reason offereth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_13">13&#160;</span>And the expectation from within, being less, <a href='#FN591'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>counteth the ignorance more than the cause which bringeth the torment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_14">14&#160;</span>But they sleeping the same sleep that night, <a href='#FN592'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>which was indeed intolerable, and which came upon them out of the bottoms of <a href='#FN593'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>inevitable hell, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_15">15&#160;</span>Were partly vexed with monstrous <a href='#FN594'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>apparitions, and partly fainted, <a href='#FN595'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>their heart failing them: for a sudden fear, and not looked for, came upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_16">16&#160;</span>So then whosoever there fell down was <a href='#FN596'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>straitly kept, shut up in a prison without iron bars, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN597' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>For whether he were husbandman, or shepherd, or a labourer in the <a href='#FN598'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>field, he was overtaken, and endured that necessity, which could not be avoided: for they were all bound with one chain of darkness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN599' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>Whether it were a <a href='#FN600'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>pp</a>whistling wind, or a melodious noise of birds among the spreading branches, or a pleasing fall of water running violently, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_19">19&#160;</span>Or a <a href='#FN601'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN602'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>terrible sound of stones cast down, or a running that could not be seen of skipping beasts, or a roaring voice of most <a href='#FN603'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>savage wild beasts, or a rebounding echo from the hollow mountains; these things made them to swoon for fear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN604' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>For the whole world shined with clear light, and none were hindered in their labour: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_21">21&#160;</span>Over them only was spread an heavy night, an image of that <a href='#FN605'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>darkness which should afterward receive them: but yet were they unto themselves more grievous than the darkness.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_1">1&#160;</span><a href='#FN606' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>Nevertheless thy <a href='#FN607'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>saints had a very great light, whose voice they <a href='#FN608'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>hearing, and not seeing their shape, because they also had not suffered the same things, they counted them happy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_2">2&#160;</span>But for that they did not hurt them now, of whom they had been wronged before, they thanked them, and besought them pardon for that they <a href='#FN609'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>had been enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_3">3&#160;</span>Instead whereof <a href='#FN610'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>thou gavest them a burning pillar of fire, both to be a guide of the unknown journey, and an <a href='#FN611'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>harmless sun to entertain them honourably. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_4">4&#160;</span><a href='#FN612' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>For they were worthy to be deprived of light and imprisoned in darkness, who had kept thy sons shut up, by whom the <a href='#FN613'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>uncorrupt light of the law was to be given unto the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_5">5&#160;</span>And <a href='#FN614'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>when they had determined to slay the babes of <a href='#FN615'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the saints, <a href='#FN616'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>one child being cast forth, and saved, to reprove them, <a href='#FN617'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>thou tookest away the multitude of their children, and <a href='#FN618'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>destroyedst them altogether in a mighty water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN619' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>Of that night were our fathers certified afore, that <a href='#FN620'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>assuredly knowing <a href='#FN621'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>unto what oaths they had given credence, they might afterwards be of good cheer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_7">7&#160;</span>So of thy people was accepted both the salvation of the righteous, and destruction of the enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_8">8&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN622'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>wherewith thou didst punish our adversaries, <a href='#FN623'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>by the same thou didst glorify us, whom thou hadst called. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_9">9&#160;</span>For the <a href='#FN624'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>righteous children of good men <a href='#FN625'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>did sacrifice <a href='#FN626'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>secretly, and with one consent made <a href='#FN627'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>a holy law, that the saints should be like partakers of the same good and evil, the fathers now singing out the songs of praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_10">10&#160;</span>But on the other side there sounded <a href='#FN628'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>an ill according cry of the enemies, and a lamentable noise was carried abroad for children that were bewailed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_11">11&#160;</span><a href='#FN629' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>The master and the servant were punished after one manner; and like as the king, so suffered the common person. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_12">12&#160;</span><a href='#FN630' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>So they all together had innumerable dead with one kind of death; neither were the living sufficient to bury them: for in one moment the noblest offspring of them was destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_13">13&#160;</span>For whereas they would not believe any thing <a href='#FN631'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>w</a>by reason of the enchantments; upon the destruction of the firstborn, <a href='#FN632'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>they acknowledged this people to be the sons of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_14">14&#160;</span>For while all things were in quiet silence, and <a href='#FN633'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>that night was in the midst of her swift course, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_15">15&#160;</span><a href='#FN634' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>Thine Almighty word leaped down from heaven <a href='#FN635'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>out of thy royal throne, as <a href='#FN636'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>a fierce man of war into the midst of a land of destruction, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_16">16&#160;</span>And brought thine <a href='#FN637'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>unfeigned commandment as <a href='#FN638'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>a sharp sword, and standing up filled all things with death; and <a href='#FN639'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>it touched the heaven, but it stood upon the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_17">17&#160;</span>Then suddenly <a href='#FN640'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN641'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>visions of horrible dreams troubled them sore, and terrors came upon them unlooked for. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_18">18&#160;</span>And one thrown here, and another there, half dead, shewed the cause of his death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_19">19&#160;</span>For the dreams that troubled them did foreshew this, lest they should perish, and not know why they were afflicted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_20">20&#160;</span>Yea, <a href='#FN642'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>the tasting of death touched <a href='#FN643'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>the righteous also, and <a href='#FN644'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>there was a destruction of the multitude in the wilderness: <a href='#FN645'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>but the wrath endured not long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_21">21&#160;</span>For then <a href='#FN646'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>the blameless man made haste, and stood forth to defend them; and bringing <a href='#FN647'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>the shield of his proper ministry, even prayer, and <a href='#FN648'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the propitiation of incense, set himself against the wrath, and so brought the calamity to an end, declaring that he was thy servant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_22">22&#160;</span>So he overcame the destroyer, not with strength of body, nor force of <a href='#FN649'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>arms, but with a word subdued he him that punished, <a href='#FN650'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>alleging the oaths and covenants made with the fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_23">23&#160;</span>For when the dead were now fallen down by heaps one upon another, <a href='#FN651'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>standing between, he stayed the wrath, and <a href='#FN652'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>parted the way to the living. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_24">24&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN653'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>in the long garment was the whole world, and <a href='#FN654'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>in the four rows of the stones was the glory of the fathers graven, and thy Majesty <a href='#FN655'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>upon the diadem of his head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_25">25&#160;</span>Unto these <a href='#FN656'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>the destroyer gave place, and was afraid of them: for it was enough that they only <a href='#FN657'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>tasted of the wrath.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_1">1&#160;</span>As for the ungodly, wrath came upon them without mercy <a href='#FN658'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>unto the end: for he knew before what they would do; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_2">2&#160;</span>How that <a href='#FN659'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>having given them leave to depart, and <a href='#FN660'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>sent them hastily away, <a href='#FN661'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>they would repent and pursue them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_3">3&#160;</span>For whilst they were yet mourning and making lamentation at the graves of the dead, they added another foolish device, and pursued them as fugitives, whom they had <a href='#FN662'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>intreated to be gone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_4">4&#160;</span>For the destiny, whereof they were worthy, drew them unto this end, and made them forget the things that had already happened, that they might fulfil the punishment which was <a href='#FN663'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>wanting to their <a href='#FN664'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>torments: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_5">5&#160;</span>And that <a href='#FN665'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>thy people might pass a wonderful way: but they might find a strange death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_6">6&#160;</span><a href='#FN666' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>For the whole creature in his proper kind was fashioned again anew, <a href='#FN667'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>serving the peculiar commandments that were given unto them, that thy children might be kept without hurt: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_7">7&#160;</span>As namely, <a href='#FN668'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>a cloud shadowing the camp; and where water stood before, dry land appeared; and <a href='#FN669'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a><a href='#FN670'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>out of the Red sea a way without impediment; and out of the violent stream a green field: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_8">8&#160;</span>Wherethrough all the people went that were defended with thy hand, seeing thy marvellous strange wonders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_9">9&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN671'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>m</a>they went at large like horses, and <a href='#FN672'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>n</a>leaped like lambs, praising thee, O Lord, who hadst delivered them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_10">10&#160;</span>For they were yet mindful of the things that were done while they sojourned in the strange land, how the ground brought forth <a href='#FN673'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>flies instead of cattle, and <a href='#FN674'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>o</a>how the river cast up a multitude of frogs instead of fishes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_11">11&#160;</span>But afterwards <a href='#FN675'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>p</a>they saw a new generation of fowls, when, being led with their appetite, they asked delicate meats. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_12">12&#160;</span>For quails came up unto them from the sea for their <a href='#FN676'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>contentment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_13">13&#160;</span>And punishments came upon the sinners not without former <a href='#FN677'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>q</a>signs <a href='#FN678'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>r</a>by the force of thunders: for they suffered justly according to their own wickedness, <a href='#FN679'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>s</a>insomuch as they used a more hard and hateful behaviour toward strangers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_14">14&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN680'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>the Sodomites did not receive those, whom they knew not when they came: but <a href='#FN681'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>these brought friends into bondage, that had well deserved of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_15">15&#160;</span>And not only so, but peradventure some <a href='#FN682'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>x</a>respect shall be had <a href='#FN683'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>t</a>of those, because they used strangers not friendly: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_16">16&#160;</span>But <a href='#FN684'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>u</a>these very grievously afflicted them, <a href='#FN685'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>y</a>whom they had received with feastings, and were already made partakers of the same laws with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore <a href='#FN686'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>z</a>even with blindness were these stricken, as <a href='#FN687'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>a</a>those were at the doors of <a href='#FN688'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>b</a>the righteous man: when, being compassed about with horrible great darkness, <a href='#FN689'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>c</a>every one sought the passage of his own doors. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_18">18&#160;</span>For the elements were changed <a href='#FN690'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>in themselves by a kind of harmony, like as in a <a href='#FN691'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>cc</a>psaltery notes change the name of the tune, and yet are always sounds; which may well be perceived by the sight of <a href='#FN692'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>d</a>the things that have been done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_19">19&#160;</span>For <a href='#FN693'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>e</a>earthly things were turned into watery, and <a href='#FN694'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>f</a>the things, that before swam in the water, now went upon the ground. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_20">20&#160;</span><a href='#FN695' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>g</a>The fire had power in the water, forgetting his own virtue: and the water forgat his own quenching nature. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_21">21&#160;</span>On the other side, <a href='#FN696'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>h</a>the flames wasted not the flesh of the corruptible living things, though they walked therein; neither <a href='#FN697'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>i</a>melted they <a href='#FN698'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>k</a>the icy kind of heavenly meat that was of nature apt to melt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_22">22&#160;</span>For in all things, O Lord, thou didst magnify thy people, and glorify them, neither didst thou lightly regard them: but didst assist them <a href='#FN699'  epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>l</a>in every time and place. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT1_16'>Deut. 1. 16</a>. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_3'>1 Kings 3. 3</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_9'>9</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS45_7'>Ps. 45. 7</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_1'>Isai. 56. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_29'>Deut. 4. 29</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R215_4'>2 Chr. 15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>maketh manifest</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_5'>ver. 5</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_8'>8</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_22'>Jer. 4. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>is rebuked, or, sheweth itself</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_8'>8</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_11'>ch. 2. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL5_22'>Gal. 5. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>lips</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_10'>Jer. 17. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG15_2'>Esther 15. 2</a>. &amp; <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_4'>16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_3'>Isai. 6. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG13_2'>Esther 13. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>upholdeth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS139_4'>Ps. 139. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_3'>ver. 3</a> marg. (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>reproving</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_14'>ch. 2. 14</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_5'>5</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_8'>8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_10"><span class="notemark">l</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_17'>ch. 5. 17</a>. See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_5'>Ex. 20. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_10"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_14'>Phil. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_14'>Phil. 2. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C212_20'>2 Cor. 12. 20</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_1'>1 Pet. 2. 1</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_11"><span class="notemark">o</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_36'>Matt. 12. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>slandereth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_11"><span class="notemark">oo</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_2'>Ecclus. 21. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_23'>Deut. 4. 23</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_23'>Deut. 4. 23</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_23'>ch. 2. 23</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E28_59'>Esdr. 8. 59</a>. See <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_32'>Ezek. 18. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_31'>Gen. 1. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM6_23'>Rom. 6. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_15'>Isai. 28. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_16"><span class="notemark">x</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_24'>ch. 2. 24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_16'>ch. 1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_1'>Job 7. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_1"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_23'>Matt. 22. 23</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_32'>1 Cor. 15. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_1"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_3'>1 Esdr. 3. 3</a>. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB2_9'>Tobit 2. 9</a>. <a href='JDT.xhtml#JT13_1'>Judith 13. 1</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M18_25'>2 Macc. 8. 25</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_36'>Luke 12. 36</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_2"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='OBA.xhtml#OB1_16'>Obad. 16</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_9'>Ecclus. 44. 9</a>. So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_19'>Job 10. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_2"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS102_3'>Ps. 102. 3</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_14'>ch. 5. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_3"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_20'>Eccles. 3. 20</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_1'>Ecclus. 17. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>moist</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_4"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ECC.xhtml#EC2_16'>Eccles. 2. 16</a>. &amp; <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_5'>9. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_4"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_9'>Job 7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>oppressed</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_5"><span class="notemark">j</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_9'>ch. 5. 9</a>. <a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_15'>1 Chr. 29. 15</a>. So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_9'>Job 8. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>he</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_5"><span class="notemark">k</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN6_17'>Dan. 6. 17</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_66'>Matt. 27. 66</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_6"><span class="notemark">l</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS22_13'>Isai. 22. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>earnestly</span>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK7_4'>Luke 7. 4</a>. <a href='TIT.xhtml#TT3_13'>Titus 3. 13</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_8"><span class="notemark">ll</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_2'>Ecclus. 32. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>jollity</span>. See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E13_20'>1 Esdr. 3. 20</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC3_22'>Eccles. 3. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_5'>ch. 1. 5</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_11'>Prov. 1. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_7'>John 7. 7</a>. <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_13'>Ephes. 5. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_9'>ch. 1. 9</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_3'>Isai. 53. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>false coin</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_16"><span class="notemark">s</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_30'>Jer. 6. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU23_10'>Numb. 23. 10</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS116_15'>Ps. 116. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_43'>Matt. 27. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_17"><span class="notemark">w</span> 2.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_8'>ch. 8. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_14'>11. 14</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_13'>1 Cor. 10. 13</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_7'>Heb. 13. 7</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_8'>Ps. 22. 8</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_18"><span class="notemark">u</span> 2.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_43'>Matt. 27. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_19"><span class="notemark">y</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_19'>Jer. 11. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_18'>18. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_19"><span class="notemark">z</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_18'>ch. 12. 18</a>. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR2_27'>Baruch 2. 27</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_19'>Song 19</a> in the Gk. See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC24_4'>Acts 24. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_19"><span class="notemark">a</span> 2.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_24'>2 Tim. 2. 24</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_20"><span class="notemark">b</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_20'>Gen. 37. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_20"><span class="notemark">c</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_7'>ch. 3. 7</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_9'>9</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_13'>13</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_15'>4. 15</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_11'>14. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_15'>19. 15</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_20'>Ecclus. 18. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_24'>23. 24</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_6'>34. 6</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK19_44'>Luke 19. 44</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_12'>1 Pet. 2. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_21"><span class="notemark">d</span> 2.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_12'>ch. 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_22"><span class="notemark">e</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_11'>Matt. 13. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>preferred</span>, or, <span class='add'>esteemed the reward</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_23"><span class="notemark">f</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_13'>ch. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_23"><span class="notemark">g</span> 2.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_26'>Gen. 1. 26</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_3'>Ecclus. 17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_24"><span class="notemark">h</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_13'>Gen. 3. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_24"><span class="notemark">i</span> 2.24</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_16'>ch. 1. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_3'>Deut. 33. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_4'>ch. 5. 4</a> (Gk.). So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_17'>ch. 4. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_6'>ch. 7. 6</a> (Gk.). See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK9_31'>Luke 9. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_9'>Ecclus. 40. 9</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M12_7'>1 Macc. 2. 7</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM3_16'>Rom. 3. 16</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_24'>Rom. 8. 24</a>. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_1'>2 Cor. 5. 1</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_13'>1 Pet. 1. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_11'>Heb. 12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>benefited</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_5'>ch. 11. 5</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_13'>13</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_2'>16. 2 </a>(Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_25'>Ex. 15. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>meet</span>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_8'>Matt. 3. 8</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC26_20'>Acts 26. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_3'>Prov. 17. 3</a>. &amp; <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_7'>1 Pet. 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_43'>Matt. 13. 43</a>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_15'>Ps. 91. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_15'>Ecclus. 4. 15</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_28'>Matt. 19. 28</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C16_2'>1 Cor. 6. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_6'>Rev. 19. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_12'>ch. 6. 12</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_27'>Ps. 119. 27</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_17'>John 7. 17</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_8'>Job 32. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>and</span> such as be <span class='add'>faithful shall remain with him in love</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">o</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC11_23'>Acts 11. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">p</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_15'>ch. 4. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">q</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ESG.xhtml#EG16_21'>Esther 16. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_41'>Matt. 25. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_11"><span class="notemark">s</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_7'>Prov. 1. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>light</span>, or, <span class='add'>unchaste</span>. Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_2'>ver. 2</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_4'>ch. 5. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_13"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_3'>Heb. 13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_13"><span class="notemark">t</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB13_3'>Heb. 13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_13"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_3'>Isai. 56. 3–5</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_12'>Matt. 19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_14"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_3'>Isai. 56. 3–5</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_12'>Matt. 19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>the chosen</span>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P12_4'>1 Pet. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>amongst the people</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_14"><span class="notemark">u</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_3'>Isai. 56. 3–5</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_12'>Matt. 19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_15"><span class="notemark">v</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_6'>Ecclus. 1. 6</a>, <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_20'>20</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_3'>ch. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_16"><span class="notemark">w</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_3'>Isai. 57. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_16"><span class="notemark">x</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_5'>ch. 4. 5</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='2SA.xhtml#S212_14'>2 Sam. 12. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>be partakers of holy things:</span> Comp. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_2'>Deut. 23. 2</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_13'>ch. 4. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_18"><span class="notemark">y</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_11'>ver. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_4'>ver. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_18"><span class="notemark">z</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PHP.xhtml#PP2_1'>Phil. 2. 1</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_12'>ch. 19. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>hearing</span>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC25_21'>Acts 25. 21</a> &amp; marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>approved</span>. See <a href='NAM.xhtml#NM1_7'>Nahum 1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 4.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC24_16'>Acts 24. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_16'>ch. 5. 16</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_12'>James 1. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1TI.xhtml#T16_12'>1 Tim. 6. 12</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_7'>2 Tim. 4. 7</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_25'>Ecclus. 23. 25</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_16'>Job 18. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_19'>Matt. 7. 19</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_19'>Matt. 7. 19</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_16'>ch. 3. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 4.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_17'>Rom. 11. 17</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_19'>19</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_20'>20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_7'>Ecclus. 41. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>sleeps</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_2'>ch. 7. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 4.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_13'>ch. 6. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_28'>16. 28</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT17_25'>Matt. 17. 25</a> Engl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_10"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_14'>ver. 14</a>. So <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_24'>Gen. 5. 24</a> (Gk.). <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_16'>Ecclus. 44. 16</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_5'>Heb. 11. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 4.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_1'>Isai. 57. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_21'>ch. 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>pervert</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB5_9'>Heb. 5. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sanctified</span>, or, <span class='add'>consummated</span>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_23'>Heb. 12. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_16'>ch. 3. 16</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_14"><span class="notemark">j</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_14'>ver. 14</a>. So <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN5_24'>Gen. 5. 24</a> (Gk.). <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_16'>Ecclus. 44. 16</a>. <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_5'>Heb. 11. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_15"><span class="notemark">nn</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_9'>ch. 15. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_16"><span class="notemark">oo</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_41'>Matt. 12. 41</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_42'>42</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_31'>Luke 11. 31</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK11_32'>32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_20'>Isai. 65. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 4.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_19"><span class="notemark">r</span> 4.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS9_6'>Ps. 9. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to the casting up of the account</span>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_23'>Matt. 18. 23</a>, <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_24'>24</a>. &amp; <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_19'>25. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 5.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_36'>Luke 21. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_19'>2 Esdr. 16. 19</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_35'>Rom. 8. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>parable</span>. Gk. as <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_3'>Matt. 13. 3</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_2'>ch. 3. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>filled ourselves</span>, or, <span class='add'>surfeited</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_24'>Job 12. 24</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_4'>Ps. 107. 4</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_40'>40</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_5'>ch. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 5.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_25'>Job 9. 25</a>. See <a href='2CH.xhtml#R230_6'>2 Chr. 30. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_26'>Job 9. 26</a>. So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_19'>Prov. 30. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_26'>Job 9. 26</a>. So <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_19'>Prov. 30. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN150"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>flieth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN151"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 5.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_13'>ch. 19. 13</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC1_3'>Acts 1. 3</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN152"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_21'>ver. 21</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_14'>Phil. 3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN153"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_14'>Job 8. 14</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_25'>Prov. 10. 25</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_28'>28</a>. &amp; <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_7'>11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN154"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>thistledown</span>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS1_4'>Ps. 1. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN155"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">l</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS103_16'>Ps. 103. 16</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_10'>James 1. 10</a>, <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN156"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>chaff</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN157"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">m</span> 5.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS68_2'>Ps. 68. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_2'>ch. 2. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN158"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 5.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_1'>Gen. 15. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_12'>Rev. 22. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN159"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>palace:</span> unless the word be taken unproperly, as <a href='2MA.xhtml#M22_17'>2 Macc. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN160"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_16"><span class="notemark">o</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_3'>Isai. 62. 3</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_2'>ch. 4. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN161"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_16"><span class="notemark">p</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_4'>Ps. 91. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN162"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_10'>ch. 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN163"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">To <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_20'>ver. 20</a>, <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP6_13'>Eph. 6. 13–17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN164"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_17"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_21'>21–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN165"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_17'>Isai. 59. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN166"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_18"><span class="notemark">ss</span> 5.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_16'>ch. 18. 16</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN167"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>equity</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_3'>ch. 9. 3</a>. Rather as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_10'>ch. 6. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_15'>10. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_17'>17</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_30'>14. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN168"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_20"><span class="notemark">t</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_17'>ver. 17</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_21'>21–23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN169"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_21"><span class="notemark">u</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E216_13'>2 Esdr. 16. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN170"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_21"><span class="notemark">i</span> 5.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_21'>ver. 21</a> (Gk.). So <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP3_14'>Phil. 3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN171"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_22"><span class="notemark">v</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_11'>Josh. 10. 11</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_15'>Ecclus. 43. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN172"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_17'>Gen. 6. 17</a>. <a href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_26'>Dan. 9. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN173"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_23"><span class="notemark">x</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_20'>ch. 11. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN174"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_20'>Job 27. 20</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN175"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_20'>Job 27. 20</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_21'>21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN176"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 5.23</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_11'>ch. 8. 11</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_52'>Luke 1. 52</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN177"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 6.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_10'>Ps. 2. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN178"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_1'>Rom. 13. 1</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_2'>2</a>. See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_15'>Prov. 8. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN179"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 6.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_4'>Rom. 13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN180"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_47'>Luke 12. 47</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_48'>48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN181"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 6.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_41'>Matt. 21. 41</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN182"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1ES.xhtml#E14_39'>1 Esdr. 4. 39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN183"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 6.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS145_9'>Ps. 145. 9</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_13'>ch. 12. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN184"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 6.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_2'>ch. 12. 2</a> (Gk.). <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB6_6'>Heb. 6. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN185"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>justified</span>. Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_11'>Rev. 22. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN186"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a defence</span>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_1'>Acts 22. 1</a>. <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP1_7'>Phil. 1. 7</a>, <a href='PHP.xhtml#PP1_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN187"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_6'>Prov. 14. 6</a>. So <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT30_11'>Deut. 30. 11–14</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_9'>ch. 3. 9</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_21'>Ecclus. 14. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_11'>21. 11</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_17'>John 7. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN188"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_13"><span class="notemark">j</span> 6.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN189"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 6.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_17'>Prov. 8. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN190"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 6.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_23'>ch. 7. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN191"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>nurture</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_11'>ch. 3. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_14'>7. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN192"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>nurture</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_11'>ch. 3. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_14'>7. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN193"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 6.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_10'>Rom. 13. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN194"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_20"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN195"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_21"><span class="notemark">o</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_8'>ch. 7. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN196"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_21"><span class="notemark">n</span> 6.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN197"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_23"><span class="notemark">p</span> 6.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_13'>ch. 7. 13</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN198"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_24"><span class="notemark">q</span> 6.24</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_14'>Prov. 11. 14</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN199"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>Gen. 2. 7</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_1'>Ecclus. 17. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN200"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_10'>Job 10. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN201"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_6'>ch. 4. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN202"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_15'>Acts 14. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN203"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 7.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_7'>Luke 2. 7</a>, <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_12'>12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN204"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_6"><span class="notemark">f</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_21'>Job 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN205"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_2'>ch. 3. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN206"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_7'>1 Kings 3. 7–9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN207"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_59'>Acts 7. 59</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN208"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_21'>ch. 6. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN209"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 7.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_15'>Job 28. 15</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN210"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>stone of inestimable Price</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN211"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_16'>Job 28. 16–19</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_15'>Prov. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN212"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_10"><span class="notemark">n</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_22'>Prov. 4. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN213"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_26'>ver. 26</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E214_47'>2 Esdr. 14. 47</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN214"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_11"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_13'>1 Kings 3. 13</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_16'>Prov. 3. 16</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_28'>Ecclus. 51. 28</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_33'>Matt. 6. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN215"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_11"><span class="notemark">p</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_13'>1 Kings 3. 13</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_16'>Prov. 3. 16</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_28'>Ecclus. 51. 28</a>. Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_33'>Matt. 6. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN216"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>without guile</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN217"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>without envy</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_23'>ch. 6. 23</a>. Comp. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_5'>James 1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN218"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_13"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See<a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_30'>Ecclus. 20. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN219"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_14"><span class="notemark">q</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_18'>Ecclus. 40. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN220"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>enter friendship with God</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN221"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_14"><span class="notemark">qq</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN222"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_14"><span class="notemark">r</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C210_18'>2 Cor. 10. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN223"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_14"><span class="notemark">rr</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_17'>ch. 6. 17</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN224"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>God grant</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN225"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>are</span> to be <span class='add'>spoken of</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN226"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_18"><span class="notemark">s</span> 7.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT33_14'>Deut. 33. 14</a> (Gk.). So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_33'>Job 38. 33</a>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM1_17'>James 1. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN227"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_19"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_29'>ver. 29</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN228"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 7.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_5'>Ecclus. 27. 5</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK2_35'>Luke 2. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN229"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_22"><span class="notemark">v</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_5'>ch. 8. 5</a>. Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_30'>Prov. 8. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN230"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>only-begotten</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN231"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_21'>ch. 10. 21</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN232"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_22"><span class="notemark">x</span> 7.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='TIT.xhtml#TT1_8'>Tit. 1. 8</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN233"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_23"><span class="notemark">y</span> 7.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_15'>ch. 6. 15</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN234"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>vapour</span>. <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM4_14'>James 4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN235"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>stream</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN236"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_25"><span class="notemark">z</span> 7.25</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_18'>2 Cor. 6. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN237"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_26"><span class="notemark">a</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB1_3'>Heb. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN238"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_26"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_11'>Ecclus. 12. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN239"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_26"><span class="notemark">b</span> 7.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2CO.xhtml#C24_4'>2 Cor. 4. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN240"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>createth</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN241"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_27"><span class="notemark">c</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_14'>ver. 14</a>. See <a href='JAS.xhtml#JM2_23'>James 2. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN242"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_27"><span class="notemark">d</span> 7.27</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN20_7'>Gen. 20. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_12'>Tobit 4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN243"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_29"><span class="notemark">t</span> 7.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_29'>ver. 29</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN244"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>profitably</span>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_7'>ver. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN245"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to marry</span> her <span class='add'>to myself</span>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_9'>ver. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN246"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SNG.xhtml#SS4_8'>Cant. 4. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN247"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_3"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_16'>16</a>. So <a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_2'>Bel and Drag. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN248"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>teacher</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN249"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>chooser</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN250"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_5"><span class="notemark">c</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_8'>ch. 7. 8</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_9'>9</a>. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_18'>Prov. 8. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN251"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 8.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_22'>ch. 7. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN252"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_3'>Exod. 31. 3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN253"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_7"><span class="notemark">q</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_7'>ver. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN254"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_6'>Prov. 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN255"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_8"><span class="notemark">g</span> 8.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_17'>ch. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN256"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_2'>ver. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN257"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_9"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_16'>16</a>. So <a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_2'>Bel and Drag. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN258"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>will</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN259"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_5'>ch. 9. 5</a>. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_7'>1 Kin. 3. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN260"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_28'>1 Kin. 3. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN261"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_11"><span class="notemark">l</span> 8.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_23'>ch. 5. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN262"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_8'>Job 29. 8</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_9'>9</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_10'>10</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN263"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_12"><span class="notemark">n</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_12'>Ecclus. 5. 12</a>. See <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG18_19'>Judg. 18. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN264"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_13"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN265"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>govern</span>. Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_1'>ver. 1</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_1'>ch. 15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN266"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_14"><span class="notemark">p</span> 8.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_21'>1 Kin. 4. 21</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K14_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN267"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>appear</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN268"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_15"><span class="notemark">q</span> 8.15</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_7'>ver. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN269"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>Being entered into mine house</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN270"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_16"><span class="notemark">b</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_9'>ver. 9</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_16'>16</a>. So <a href='BEL.xhtml#BL1_2'>Bel and Drag. 2</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN271"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_3'>Prov. 7. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN272"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 8.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN273"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fame</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN274"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>marry her</span>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_2'>ver. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN275"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_20"><span class="notemark">s</span> 8.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_2'>John 9. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN276"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_27'>Ecclus. 6. 27</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN277"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>went</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN278"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_21"><span class="notemark">u</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">ch 16. 28. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_2'>Rom. 11. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN279"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 9.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_3'>Gen. 1. 3</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_6'>6</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_9'>9</a>, &amp;c. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS33_9'>Ps. 33. 9</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_3'>John 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN280"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_28'>Gen. 1. 28</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS8_6'>Ps. 8. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN281"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 9.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_19'>ch. 5. 19</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN282"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1KI.xhtml#K13_9'>1 Kings 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN283"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_18'>ch. 15. 18</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_1'>John 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN284"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS116_16'>Ps. 116. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN285"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 9.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_10'>ch. 8. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN286"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 9.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC19_27'>Acts 19. 27</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN287"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R128_5'>1 Chr. 28. 5</a>. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_9'>2 Chr. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN288"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_8"><span class="notemark">k</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>2 Sam. 7. 12</a>, <a href='2SA.xhtml#S27_13'>13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN289"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_8"><span class="notemark">l</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS99_9'>Ps. 99. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN290"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_8"><span class="notemark">m</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB8_5'>Heb. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN291"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_8"><span class="notemark">n</span> 9.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_34'>Matt. 25. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN292"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_9"><span class="notemark">e</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_18'>ch. 15. 18</a>. See <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_1'>John 1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN293"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_9"><span class="notemark">o</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_22'>Prov. 8. 22</a>, <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_27'>27</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_2'>John 1. 2</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_3'>3</a>, <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN294"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_10"><span class="notemark">p</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS20_6'>Ps. 20. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN295"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>by her power</span>, or, <span class='add'>glory</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN296"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_17'>ver. 17</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_6'>Ecclus. 1. 6</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_34'>Rom. 11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN297"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fearful</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_12'>Ecclus. 2. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_18'>22. 18</a>. <a href='1MA.xhtml#M13_56'>1 Macc. 3. 56</a>. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_26'>Matt. 8. 26</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_40'>Mark 4. 40</a>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_8'>Rev. 21. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN298"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_15"><span class="notemark">r</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_1'>2 Cor. 5. 1</a>, <a href='2CO.xhtml#C25_4'>4</a>. See <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_19'>Job 4. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN299"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_47'>1 Cor. 15. 47</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_48'>48</a>, <a href='1CO.xhtml#C115_49'>49</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN300"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_16"><span class="notemark">t</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2ES.xhtml#E24_9'>2 Esdr. 4. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN301"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>athand</span>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_3'>ch. 19. 3</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN302"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_17"><span class="notemark">q</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_17'>ver. 17</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_6'>Ecclus. 1. 6</a>. See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_34'>Rom. 11. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN303"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_10'>1 Cor. 2. 10</a>, <a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN304"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_17"><span class="notemark">u</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_10'>1 Cor. 2. 10</a>, <a href='1CO.xhtml#C12_11'>11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN305"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_18"><span class="notemark">x</span> 9.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_4'>ch. 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN306"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='1TI.xhtml#T12_13'>1 Tim. 2. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN307"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_28'>Gen. 1. 28</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_20'>2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN308"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_5'>Gen. 4. 5</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_8'>8</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_11'>11–13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN309"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_5'>Gen. 4. 5</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_8'>8</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN4_11'>11–13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN310"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_19'>Gen. 7. 19</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_21'>21–23</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_5'>2 Pet. 2. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN311"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_18'>ch. 9. 18</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_11'>ver. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN312"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_9'>Gen. 6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN313"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_4"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.4</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_5'>ch. 14. 5</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN314"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN11_9'>Gen. 11. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN315"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_1'>Gen. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN316"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_5"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_21'>ch. 18. 21</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_15'>ver. 15</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_22'>ch. 2. 22</a>. See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_6'>Luke 1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN317"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_5"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_10'>Gen. 22. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN318"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN319"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_6"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_16'>Gen. 19. 16</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_17'>17</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN320"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_6"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_17'>ch. 19. 17</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_7'>2 Pet. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN321"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>Pentapolis</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN322"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_6"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN10_19'>Gen. 10. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN13_10'>13. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_22'>19. 22</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT29_23'>Deut. 29. 23</a>. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS11_8'>Hos. 11. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN323"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_7"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_26'>Gen. 19. 26</a>. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK17_32'>Luke 17. 32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN324"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_10"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_5'>Gen. 28. 5</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_10'>10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN325"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_10"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN28_12'>Gen. 28. 12–22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN326"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_10"><span class="notemark">s</span> 10.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN30_43'>Gen. 30. 43</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN327"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_11"><span class="notemark">t</span> 10.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN31_1'>Gen. 31. 1–16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN328"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_12"><span class="notemark">u</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_6'>Gen. 32. 6</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_7'>7</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN33_4'>33. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN329"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_12"><span class="notemark">x</span> 10.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN32_24'>Gen. 32. 24–30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN330"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_13"><span class="notemark">y</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_28'>Gen. 37. 28</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_9'>Acts 7. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN331"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_13"><span class="notemark">z</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN39_7'>Gen. 39. 7–9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN332"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_13"><span class="notemark">a</span> 10.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_24'>Gen. 37. 24</a> or <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN37_20'>Gen. 39. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN333"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_14"><span class="notemark">b</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_14'>Gen. 41. 14</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_40'>40</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_41'>41</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_10'>Acts 7. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN334"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>the power of them that rule d over him</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN335"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_14"><span class="notemark">c</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Construction as <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_1'>Matt. 10. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN336"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_14"><span class="notemark">d</span> 10.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN39_17'>Gen. 39. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN337"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_15"><span class="notemark">e</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_12'>Ex. 1. 12</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_42'>12. 42</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN338"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>holy</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_17'>ver. 17</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_19'>ch. 5. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_10'>6. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_30'>14. 30</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_65'>Song 65</a> (text).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN339"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_15"><span class="notemark">f</span> 10.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_5'>ver. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN340"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_16"><span class="notemark">g</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_10'>Ex. 3. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_12'>4. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN341"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_16"><span class="notemark">h</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_31'>Ex. 14. 31</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_26'>Ps. 105. 26</a>. See <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB3_5'>Heb. 3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN342"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_16"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_1'>Ex. 5. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_10'>7. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_0'>ch. 8</a>–<a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_0'>ch. 13</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_27'>Ps. 105. 27–36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN343"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_16"><span class="notemark">i</span> 10.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_1'>Ex. 5. 1</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_10'>7. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_0'>ch. 8</a>–<a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_0'>ch. 13</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_27'>Ps. 105. 27–36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN344"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_17"><span class="notemark">j</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_35'>Ex. 12. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN345"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>holy</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_17'>ver. 17</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_19'>ch. 5. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_10'>6. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_30'>14. 30</a>. <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_65'>Song 65</a> (text).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN346"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_17"><span class="notemark">k</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_39'>Ps. 105. 39</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_27'>Ecclus. 14. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN347"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_17"><span class="notemark">l</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_14'>Ps. 78. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN348"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>flame</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_18'>ch. 16. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN349"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_18"><span class="notemark">m</span> 10.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_21'>Ex. 14. 21</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_22'>22</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>29</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_13'>Ps. 78. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN350"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_19"><span class="notemark">n</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_27'>Ex. 14. 27</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_28'>28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN351"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_19"><span class="notemark">o</span> 10.19</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2MA.xhtml#M21_12'>2 Macc. 1. 12</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN352"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_20"><span class="notemark">p</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_23'>ch. 16. 23</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_20'>18. 20</a>. Gk. not as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_15'>ver. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN353"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 10.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_1'>Ex. 15. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN354"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 10.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_22'>ch. 7. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN355"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT34_10'>Deut. 34. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN356"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_1'>Ex. 16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN357"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 11.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_10'>Ex. 17. 10</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_11'>11</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_13'>13</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_10'>2 Esdr. 1. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN358"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 11.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_6'>Ex. 17. 6</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU20_11'>Numb. 20. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN359"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_6"><span class="notemark">e</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_17'>Ex. 7. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN360"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_16'>Ex. 1. 16</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_22'>22</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_5'>ch. 18. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN361"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_16'>Ps. 78. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN362"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_8"><span class="notemark">h</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_20'>Ex. 7. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN363"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_9"><span class="notemark">i</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN364"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_10"><span class="notemark">j</span> 11.10</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_7'>Heb. 12. 7</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_5'>Deut. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN365"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_13"><span class="notemark">k</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_8'>Ex. 8. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN366"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>perceived</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN367"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_14"><span class="notemark">l</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_3'>Ex. 2. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN368"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_14"><span class="notemark">m</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_17'>ch. 2. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN369"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_9'>ch. 17. 9</a>. Gk. as <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_23'>Rom. 1. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN370"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_14'>ch. 13. 14</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_18'>ch. 15. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN371"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_15"><span class="notemark">p</span> 11.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_2'>Ex. 8. 2</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_17'>17</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN372"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_16"><span class="notemark">q</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_23'>ch. 12. 23</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_24'>24</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_1'>16. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN373"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_17"><span class="notemark">r</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_2'>Gen. 1. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN374"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_17"><span class="notemark">s</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_22'>Lev. 26. 22</a>. Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_17'>Jer. 8. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN375"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_18"><span class="notemark">t</span> 11.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_5'>ch. 16. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN376"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_20"><span class="notemark">u</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC28_4'>Acts 28. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN377"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_20"><span class="notemark">v</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_23'>ch. 5. 23</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN378"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_20"><span class="notemark">w</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_25'>Ecclus. 16. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN379"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_20"><span class="notemark">ww</span> 11.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_9'>Ecclus. 1. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN380"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_21"><span class="notemark">x</span> 11.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_6'>2 Chr. 20. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN381"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>little weight</span>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_15'>Isai. 40. 15</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN382"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_22"><span class="notemark">y</span> 11.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_4'>Hos. 6. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS13_3'>13. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN383"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_23"><span class="notemark">z</span> 11.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='2PE.xhtml#P23_9'>2 Pet. 3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN384"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_25"><span class="notemark">a</span> 11.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM4_17'>Rom. 4. 17</a>. See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS147_4'>Ps. 147. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN385"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_26"><span class="notemark">b</span> 11.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_8'>ch. 12. 8</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_16'>16</a> (Gk.). So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_18'>ch. 12. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN386"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_2"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_9'>ch. 6. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN387"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ancient</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN388"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_12'>Deut. 18. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN389"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sorceries</span>. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_21'>Rev. 9. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_23'>18. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN390"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_4"><span class="notemark">c</span> 12.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GAL.xhtml#GL5_20'>Gal. 5. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN391"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_5"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_23'>ch. 14. 23</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_21'>Lev. 18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN392"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_6"><span class="notemark">d</span> 12.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_23'>ch. 14. 23</a>. See <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_21'>Lev. 18. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN393"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>new inhabitance</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN394"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_26'>ch. 11. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN395"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_8"><span class="notemark">f</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_28'>Ex. 23. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN396"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_30'>Ex. 23. 30</a>. <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_22'>Deut. 7. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN397"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN9_25'>Gen. 9. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN398"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_12"><span class="notemark">i</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_20'>Rom. 9. 20</a>. Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB36_23'>Job 36. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN399"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_12"><span class="notemark">j</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB12_7'>Heb. 12. 7</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_5'>Deut. 8. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN400"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ROM.xhtml#RM8_33'>Rom. 8. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN401"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in thy presence</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN402"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a revenger</span>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_4'>Rom. 13. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN403"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_13"><span class="notemark">l</span> 12.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1PE.xhtml#P15_7'>1 Pet. 5. 7</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_7'>ch. 6. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN404"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_14"><span class="notemark">m</span> 12.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_5'>Ecclus. 19. 5</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_15'>Acts 27. 15</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN405"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_15"><span class="notemark">n</span> 12.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_2'>Job 10. 2</a>, <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_3'>3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN406"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_16"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_26'>ch. 11. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN407"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>perfect</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN408"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_19'>ch. 2. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN409"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_18"><span class="notemark">e</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_26'>ch. 11. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN410"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 12.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_6'>Ps. 135. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN411"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_22'>Rom. 9. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN412"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_20"><span class="notemark">r</span> 12.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_22'>ch. 19. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN413"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_21"><span class="notemark">s</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP5_15'>Ephes. 5. 15</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB4_14'>Tobit 4. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN414"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_21"><span class="notemark">t</span> 12.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_8'>Deut. 7. 8</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT13_17'>13. 17</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN415"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_22"><span class="notemark">u</span> 12.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_2'>Matt. 7. 2</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_7'>Matt. 5. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN416"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_23"><span class="notemark">v</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_15'>ch. 11. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_16'>16</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_1'>16. 1</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN417"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>abominable idols</span>. <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_5'>1 Kin. 11. 5</a>, <a href='1KI.xhtml#K111_7'>7</a>. <a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_13'>2 Kin. 23. 13</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN418"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_23"><span class="notemark">w</span> 12.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_11'>ch. 14. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN419"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_24"><span class="notemark">v</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_15'>ch. 11. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_16'>16</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_1'>16. 1</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN420"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_24"><span class="notemark">x</span> 12.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_3'>ch. 13. 3</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_23'>Rom. 1. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN421"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_26"><span class="notemark">y</span> 12.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_12'>ch. 15. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN422"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_27"><span class="notemark">z</span> 12.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN423"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_27"><span class="notemark">a</span> 12.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1TH.xhtml#H12_16'>1 Thess. 2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN424"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">To end <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_0'>ch. 15</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_19'>Rom. 1. 19–32</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN425"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_27'>Ecclus. 38. 27</a> (Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN426"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_19'>Deut. 4. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_19'>17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN427"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_19'>Deut. 4. 19</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_19'>17. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN428"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 13.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_24'>ch. 12. 24</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN429"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 13.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_20'>Rom. 1. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN430"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_7"><span class="notemark">f</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_21'>Rom. 1. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN431"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>seck</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN432"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_17'>ch. 15. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN433"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_10"><span class="notemark">h</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>Baruch 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN434"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_10"><span class="notemark">i</span> 13.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC17_29'>Acts. 17. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN435"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_11"><span class="notemark">j</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_19'>Isai. 40. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN436"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>timber-wright</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN437"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_11"><span class="notemark">k</span> 13.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_59'>Baruch 6. 59</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_21'>2 Tim. 2. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN438"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_12"><span class="notemark">l</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_15'>Isai. 44. 15</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_16'>16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN439"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>chips</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN440"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_12"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN441"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_13"><span class="notemark">m</span> 13.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_13'>ver. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN442"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_14"><span class="notemark">n</span> 13.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_15'>ch. 11. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN443"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_15"><span class="notemark">o</span> 13.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_7'>Isai. 46. 7</a>. Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_26'>Baruch 6. 26</a>, <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN444"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_17"><span class="notemark">p</span> 13.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_17'>Isai. 44. 17</a>, <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_19'>19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN445"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_18"><span class="notemark">g</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_18'>ver. 18</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_17'>ch. 15. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN446"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_18"><span class="notemark">q</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC26_22'>Acts 26. 22</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>Baruch 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN447"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>that hath no experience at all</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN448"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_18"><span class="notemark">r</span> 13.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_5'>Jer. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN449"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>ship</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN450"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.2</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>vessel</span>, or, <span class='add'>ship</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN451"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 14.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_22'>Ex. 14. 22</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_23'>Ps. 107. 23–30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN452"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_5"><span class="notemark">b</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_4'>ch. 10. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN453"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_6"><span class="notemark">c</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN6_4'>Gen. 6. 4</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_10'>7. 10</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_18'>18</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_21'>21</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN7_22'>22</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_7'>Ecclus. 16. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN454"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P13_20'>1 Pet. 3. 20</a> or <a href='2ES.xhtml#E25_5'>2 Esdr. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN455"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 14.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_8'>Ps. 115. 8</a>. See <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_4'>Baruch 6. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN456"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 14.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS5_5'>Ps. 5. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN457"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_12'>Ex. 12. 12</a> text. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU33_4'>Num. 33. 4</a>. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_11'>Jer. 10. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='JER.xhtml#JR46_25'>46. 25</a>. See <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_1'>Isai. 46. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN458"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>to</span>, or, <span class='add'>by</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN459"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_15'>Jer. 10. 15</a>. See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN460"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>scandals</span>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_41'>Matt. 13. 41</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN461"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_22'>Ps. 69. 22</a> (Gk.). <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_9'>Rom. 11. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_8'>Jer. 10. 8</a>. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK2_18'>Hab. 2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN462"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>trap</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN463"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_11"><span class="notemark">i</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_22'>Ps. 69. 22</a> (Gk.). <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM11_9'>Rom. 11. 9</a>. Comp. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_8'>Jer. 10. 8</a>. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK2_18'>Hab. 2. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN464"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_12"><span class="notemark">j</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_27'>ver. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN465"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_12"><span class="notemark">k</span> 14.12</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_4'>ch. 15. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN466"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN467"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN468"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>in time</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN469"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>tyrants</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_21'>ch. 6. 21</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_14'>12. 14</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_5'>Ecclus. 11. 5</a>. Gk. not as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_17'>ver. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN470"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>in sight</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_19'>ch. 15. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN471"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 14.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C27_11'>2 Cor. 7. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN472"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_18"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_27'>ver. 27</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC26_5'>Acts 26. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN473"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>to the better</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN474"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_17'>ch. 15. 17</a> (Gk.). See <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_4'>2 Thess. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN475"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_21"><span class="notemark">p</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_11'>Ecclus. 8. 11</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN476"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_21"><span class="notemark">q</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_8'>Isai. 42. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN477"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>of God</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN478"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_23"><span class="notemark">r</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_5'>ch. 12. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN479"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_23"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN480"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_23"><span class="notemark">l</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_23'>ver. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN481"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_23"><span class="notemark">s</span> 14.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M26_4'>2 Macc. 6. 4</a>. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM13_13'>Rom. 13. 13</a> (Gk.). <a href='GAL.xhtml#GL5_21'>Gal. 5. 21</a>. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P14_3'>1 Pet. 4. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN482"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_25"><span class="notemark">t</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_29'>Rom. 1. 29–31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN483"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>confusedly</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN484"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_26"><span class="notemark">u</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_29'>ch. 16. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN485"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sex</span>. Comp. <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_26'>Rom. 1. 26</a>, <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN486"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_26"><span class="notemark">v</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_20'>Acts 15. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN487"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_26"><span class="notemark">w</span> 14.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_22'>Mark 7. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN488"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_27"><span class="notemark">x</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM1_25'>Rom. 1. 25</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_12'>ver. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN489"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_27"><span class="notemark">n</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_27'>ver. 27</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC26_5'>Acts 26. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN490"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.27</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>nameless</span>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_13'>Ex. 23. 13</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_4'>Ps. 16. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN491"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_28"><span class="notemark">y</span> 14.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_31'>Jer. 5. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN492"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_29"><span class="notemark">z</span> 14.29</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='BAR.xhtml#BR6_35'>Baruch 6. 35</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN493"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.30</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>devoted</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN494"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_3"><span class="notemark">a</span> 15.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_15'>ch. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN495"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_4"><span class="notemark">b</span> 15.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_12'>ch. 14. 12</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC8_22'>Acts 8. 22</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN496"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>turneth a reproach to the foolish</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN497"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_21'>Rom. 9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN498"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 15.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='ROM.xhtml#RM9_21'>Rom. 9. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN499"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_8"><span class="notemark">d</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_19'>Gen. 3. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN500"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 15.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK12_20'>Luke 12. 20</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN501"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>be sick</span>, or, <span class='add'>die</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_16'>ch. 4. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN502"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_10"><span class="notemark">f</span> 15.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_20'>Isai. 44. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN503"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_11"><span class="notemark">g</span> 15.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_7'>Gen. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN504"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_12"><span class="notemark">h</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_26'>ch. 12. 26</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN505"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>life</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN506"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>So</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN507"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 15.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN508"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS115_5'>Ps. 115. 5–7</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_16'>135. 16</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS135_17'>17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN509"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>air</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN510"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_16"><span class="notemark">l</span> 15.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_8'>ver. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN511"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_17"><span class="notemark">m</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_10'>ch. 13. 10</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN512"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_17"><span class="notemark">n</span> 15.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_20'>ch. 14. 20</a> (Gk.). See <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_4'>2 Thess. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN513"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_18"><span class="notemark">o</span> 15.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_15'>ch. 11. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN514"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_19"><span class="notemark">p</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_7'>ch. 14. 7</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN515"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 15.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_25'>Gen. 1. 25</a>, <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_31'>31</a>. &amp; <a href='GEN.xhtml#GN3_14'>3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN516"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_15'>ch. 11. 15</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_16'>16</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_23'>12. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN517"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_2"><span class="notemark">aa</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_5'>ch. 3. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN518"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_13'>Ex. 16. 13</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_31'>Num. 11. 31</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_11'>ch. 19. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN519"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_3"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_5'>Ex. 8. 5</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_28'>28</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_18'>ver. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN520"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_3"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.3</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_20'>ch. 14. 20</a> (Gk.). See <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_4'>2 Thess. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN521"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_4"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.4</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN522"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_5"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_18'>ch. 11. 18</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_30'>Ecclus. 39. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN523"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>thy people</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN524"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_5"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_6'>Numb. 21. 6</a>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C110_9'>1 Cor. 10. 9</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_30'>Ecclus. 39. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN525"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_6"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_20'>ch. 14. 20</a> (Gk.). See <a href='2TH.xhtml#H22_4'>2 Thess. 2. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN526"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_6"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU21_9'>Numb. 21. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN527"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_6"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_10'>ch. 13. 10</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_18'>18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN528"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_7"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_14'>John 3. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN529"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_7"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1TI.xhtml#T14_10'>1 Tim. 4. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN530"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_9"><span class="notemark">j</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_4'>Exod. 10. 4</a> (Gk.). <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_3'>Rev. 9. 3</a>, <a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_7'>7</a> (Gk.). Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_17'>Ex. 10. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN531"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_9"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_24'>Ex. 8. 24</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_45'>Ps. 78. 45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN532"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_9"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='REV.xhtml#RV16_6'>Rev. 16. 6</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_4'>ch. 18. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN533"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>stung</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN534"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_11"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN535"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_11"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_3'>ver. 3</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN536"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>never drawn from</span>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_1'>Ecclus. 41. 1</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN537"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_12"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_6'>Isai. 1. 6</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN538"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_12"><span class="notemark">p</span> 16.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS107_20'>Ps. 107. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN539"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS105_27'>Ps. 105. 27–45</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN540"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 16.13</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB13_2'>Tobit 13. 2</a>. Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_18'>Rev. 1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN541"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_14"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_28'>Matt. 10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN542"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 16.14</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC8_8'>Eccles. 8. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN543"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_15"><span class="notemark">s</span> 16.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_28'>Matt. 10. 28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN544"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_2'>Ex. 5. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN545"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_16"><span class="notemark">v</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2ES.xhtml#E215_11'>2 Esdr. 15. 11</a>. See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_34'>Deut. 4. 34</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN546"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_16"><span class="notemark">w</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_23'>Ex. 9. 23</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN547"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_16"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_16'>ver. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN548"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_16"><span class="notemark">w</span> 16.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_23'>Ex. 9. 23</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN549"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_17"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_20'>ch. 19. 20</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN550"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_17"><span class="notemark">y</span> 16.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='JDG.xhtml#JG5_20'>Judg. 5. 20</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_24'>ver. 24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN551"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_18"><span class="notemark">z</span> 16.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_21'>ch. 19. 21</a>. Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_3'>ver. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN552"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_20"><span class="notemark">a</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_14'>Ex. 16. 14</a>. <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU11_7'>Numb. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN553"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_20"><span class="notemark">b</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_25'>Ps. 78. 25</a>. <a href='2ES.xhtml#E21_19'>2 Esdr. 1. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN554"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_20"><span class="notemark">c</span> 16.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_31'>John 6. 31</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN555"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_21"><span class="notemark">d</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG6_4'>Judg. 6. 4</a> (Gk. &amp; Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN556"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, <span class='add'>manna</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN557"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>was tempered</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN558"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_22"><span class="notemark">e</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_21'>ch. 19. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN559"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_22"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_22'>ver. 22</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_21'>ch. 19. 21</a> with <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_14'>Ex. 16. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN560"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_23'>Ex. 9. 23</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN561"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_22"><span class="notemark">x</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_20'>ch. 19. 20</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_22'>ver. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN562"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_22"><span class="notemark">w</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_23'>Ex. 9. 23</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_24'>24</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN563"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_22"><span class="notemark">f</span> 16.22</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_19'>ver. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN564"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_23"><span class="notemark">g</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_22'>ver. 22</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_21'>ch. 19. 21</a> with <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_14'>Ex. 16. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN565"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_23"><span class="notemark">h</span> 16.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_20'>18. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN566"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_24"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_6'>ch. 19. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN567"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_25"><span class="notemark">i</span> 16.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_6'>ch. 19. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN568"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, things.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN569"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16.25</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>of them that prayed</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_2'>ch. 18. 2</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN570"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_26"><span class="notemark">j</span> 16.26</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='DEU.xhtml#DT4_37'>Deut. 4. 37</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT7_13'>7. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT10_15'>10. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN571"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_26"><span class="notemark">k</span> 16.26</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_3'>Deut. 8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN572"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_27"><span class="notemark">l</span> 16.27</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_21'>Ex. 16. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN573"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_28"><span class="notemark">m</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS88_13'>Ps. 88. 13</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_7'>ch. 4. 7</a>. See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_14'>Ecclus. 32. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN574"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_28"><span class="notemark">n</span> 16.28</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_21'>ch. 8. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN575"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS16_29"><span class="notemark">o</span> 16.29</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='LUK.xhtml#LK6_35'>Luke 6. 35</a>. <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_2'>2 Tim. 3. 2</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_26'>ch. 14. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN576"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_6'>Ex. 6. 6</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_4'>7. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN577"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>souls that will not be reformed</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN578"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_22'>Ex. 10. 22</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_23'>23</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_17'>ch. 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN579"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>under</span> their <span class='add'>roofs</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN580"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>fugitives</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_3'>ch. 19. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN581"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, in.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN582"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>sights</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN583"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 17.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_6'>ch. 19. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN584"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_7"><span class="notemark">c</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_11'>Ex. 7. 11</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_12'>12</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_7'>8. 7</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_19'>19</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_11'>9. 11</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_13'>ch. 18. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN585"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_7"><span class="notemark">d</span> 17.7</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_8'>2 Tim. 3. 8</a>, <a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN586"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_8"><span class="notemark">e</span> 17.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB5_7'>Heb. 5. 7</a> (text).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN587"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_9"><span class="notemark">f</span> 17.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_15'>ch. 11. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN588"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>refusing to look upon</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN589"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_10"><span class="notemark">g</span> 17.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_21'>Ex. 10. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN590"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_11"><span class="notemark">h</span> 17.11</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_22'>Job 15. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN591"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_13"><span class="notemark">i</span> 17.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_6'>ver. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN592"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="notemark">k</span><span class='add'>wherein</span> they <span class='add'>could do nothing</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN593"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 17.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as marg. Comp. <a href='ECC.xhtml#EC9_10'>Eccles. 9. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN594"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_15"><span class="notemark">l</span> 17.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT14_26'>Matt. 14. 26</a>. <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_49'>Mark 6. 49</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN595"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_15"><span class="notemark">m</span> 17.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK21_26'>Luke 21. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN596"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_16"><span class="notemark">n</span> 17.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2CO.xhtml#C211_32'>2 Cor. 11. 32</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN597"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_17"><span class="notemark">o</span> 17.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_17'>ch. 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN598"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>desert</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN599"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_18"><span class="notemark">p</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_36'>Lev. 26. 36</a>. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS53_5'>Ps. 53. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN600"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_18"><span class="notemark">pp</span> 17.18</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='S3Y.xhtml#PA1_27'>Song 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN601"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>hideous</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN602"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 17.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. the same.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN603"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_19"><span class="notemark">q</span> 17.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. the same.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN604"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_20"><span class="notemark">o</span> 17.20</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_17'>ch. 19. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN605"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS17_21"><span class="notemark">r</span> 17.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_17'>2 Pet. 2. 17</a>. <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_13'>Jude 13</a>. See <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_12'>Matt. 8. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN606"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_23'>Ex. 10. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN607"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_1"><span class="notemark">h</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_22'>Job 15. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN608"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_1"><span class="notemark">b</span> 18.1</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC9_7'>Acts 9. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN609"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 18.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='2MA.xhtml#M23_4'>2 Macc. 3. 4</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN610"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_3"><span class="notemark">d</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>Ex. 13. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN611"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_3"><span class="notemark">e</span> 18.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS121_6'>PS. 121. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN612"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_10'>ch. 16. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN613"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>incorruptible</span>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_1'>ch. 12. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN614"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_7'>ch. 11. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN615"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_5"><span class="notemark">h</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_1'>ver. 1</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_9'>9</a> (Gk.). See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_5'>Ps. 50. 5</a> (Gk. &amp; Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN616"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_5"><span class="notemark">i</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_3'>Ex. 2. 3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_5'>5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN617"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_5"><span class="notemark">k</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_29'>Ex. 12. 29</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN618"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_5"><span class="notemark">l</span> 18.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_24'>Ex. 14. 24</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_25'>25</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_27'>27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN619"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_6"><span class="notemark">m</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_4'>Ex. 11. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN620"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_6"><span class="notemark">n</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_36'>Acts 2. 36</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN621"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_6"><span class="notemark">o</span> 18.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_13'>Gen. 15. 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN622"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_8"><span class="notemark">p</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_10'>ver. 10</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN623"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_8"><span class="notemark">q</span> 18.8</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_9'>ver. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN624"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_9"><span class="notemark">h</span> 18.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_1'>ver. 1</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_9'>9</a> (Gk.). See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_5'>Ps. 50. 5</a> (Gk. &amp; Engl.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN625"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_9"><span class="notemark">r</span> 18.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_21'>Ex. 12. 21–28</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN626"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_9"><span class="notemark">s</span> 18.9</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_22'>Ex. 12. 22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN627"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>a covenant of God</span>, or, <span class='add'>league</span>. Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS50_5'>Ps. 50. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN628"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_10"><span class="notemark">t</span> 18.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_30'>Ex. 12. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN629"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_11"><span class="notemark">u</span> 18.11</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_5'>Ex. 11. 5</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_29'>12. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN630"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_12"><span class="notemark">t</span> 18.12</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_30'>Ex. 12. 30</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN631"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_13"><span class="notemark">w</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_7'>ch. 17. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN632"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_13"><span class="notemark">x</span> 18.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_33'>Ex. 12. 33</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN633"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_14"><span class="notemark">k</span> 18.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_29'>Ex. 12. 29</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN634"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_15"><span class="notemark">k</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_29'>Ex. 12. 29</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_14'>ver. 14</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_15'>15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN635"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_15"><span class="notemark">y</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_4'>ch. 9. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN636"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_15"><span class="notemark">z</span> 18.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_3'>Ex. 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN637"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_16"><span class="notemark">a</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_18'>ch. 5. 18</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN638"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_16"><span class="notemark">b</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_16'>Rev. 1. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN639"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_16"><span class="notemark">c</span> 18.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='1CH.xhtml#R121_16'>1 Chr. 21. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN640"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>imaginations</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN641"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_17"><span class="notemark">d</span> 18.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_4'>ch. 17. 4</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN642"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_20"><span class="notemark">q</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_20'>ver. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN643"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_20"><span class="notemark">e</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_20'>ch. 10. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_23'>16. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN644"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_20"><span class="notemark">f</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_45'>Numb. 16. 45</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_48'>48</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_49'>49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN645"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_20"><span class="notemark">f</span> 18.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_45'>Numb. 16. 45</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_48'>48</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_49'>49</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN646"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_21"><span class="notemark">g</span> 18.21</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_5'>ch. 10. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN647"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_21"><span class="notemark">i</span> 18.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN648"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_21"><span class="notemark">h</span> 18.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_46'>Num. 16. 46</a>, <a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_47'>47</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN649"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_22"><span class="notemark">i</span> 18.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Gk. as <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_21'>ver. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN650"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_22"><span class="notemark">k</span> 18.22</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_13'>Ex. 32. 13</a>. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_8'>Ecclus. 36. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN651"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_23"><span class="notemark">l</span> 18.23</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_48'>Num. 16. 48</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN652"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18.23</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>cut off</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN653"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_24"><span class="notemark">m</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_2'>Ex. 28. 2</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_6'>6</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_10'>31. 10</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_10'>Ecclus. 45. 10</a>. &amp; <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_11'>50. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN654"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_24"><span class="notemark">n</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_17'>Ex. 28. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN655"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_24"><span class="notemark">o</span> 18.24</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_36'>Ex. 28. 36–38</a>. So <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_12'>Ecclus. 45. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN656"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_25"><span class="notemark">p</span> 18.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='HEB.xhtml#HB11_28'>Heb. 11. 28</a>. So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_49'>Ps. 78. 49</a>. See <a href='TOB.xhtml#TB3_8'>Tobit 3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN657"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS18_25"><span class="notemark">q</span> 18.25</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_20'>ver. 20</a> (Gk.).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN658"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_1"><span class="notemark">a</span> 19.1</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='1TH.xhtml#H12_16'>1 Thess. 2. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN659"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_2"><span class="notemark">b</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_33'>Ex. 12. 33</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_39'>39</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN660"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_2"><span class="notemark">c</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='JDT.xhtml#JT10_15'>Judith 10. 15</a> (Gk.). See <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_3'>Acts 15. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN661"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_2"><span class="notemark">d</span> 19.2</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_5'>Ex. 14. 5</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN662"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>cast out by intreaty</span>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN663"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_4"><span class="notemark">e</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='TIT.xhtml#TT1_5'>Titus 1. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN664"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_4"><span class="notemark">f</span> 19.4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK16_23'>Luke 16. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN665"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_5"><span class="notemark">g</span> 19.5</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_28'>Ex. 14. 28</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN666"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_6"><span class="notemark">h</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_24'>ch. 16. 24</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_25'>25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN667"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_6"><span class="notemark">i</span> 19.6</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_36'>Acts 13. 36</a> marg.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN668"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_7"><span class="notemark">k</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_21'>Ex. 13. 21</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN669"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_7"><span class="notemark">g</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_28'>Ex. 14. 28</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN670"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_7"><span class="notemark">l</span> 19.7</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='PSA.xhtml#PS106_9'>Ps. 106. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN671"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_9"><span class="notemark">m</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_13'>Isai. 63. 13</a>. Comp. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK3_15'>Hab. 3. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN672"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_9"><span class="notemark">n</span> 19.9</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS114_4'>Ps. 114. 4</a>. So <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS77_20'>Ps. 77. 20</a>. &amp; <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_52'>78. 52</a>. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_11'>Isai. 63. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN673"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>lice</span>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_16'>Ex. 8. 16</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN674"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_10"><span class="notemark">o</span> 19.10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_3'>Ex. 8. 3</a>, <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_6'>6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN675"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_11"><span class="notemark">p</span> 19.11</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_2'>ch. 16. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN676"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class='add'>comfort</span>. <a href='1CO.xhtml#C114_3'>1 Cor. 14. 3</a>. So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_18'>ch. 3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN677"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_13"><span class="notemark">q</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_11'>ch. 5. 11</a>. <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC1_3'>Acts 1. 3</a> in the Gk.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN678"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_13"><span class="notemark">r</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS77_17'>Ps. 77. 17</a>, <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS77_18'>18</a>, rather than <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_16'>ch. 16. 16</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_22'>22</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN679"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_13"><span class="notemark">s</span> 19.13</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_11'>Ex. 1. 11</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_6'>5. 6–9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN680"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_14"><span class="notemark">t</span> 19.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_4'>Gen. 19. 4–8</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_8'>Ecclus. 16. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN681"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_14"><span class="notemark">u</span> 19.14</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_55'>Gen. 41. 55–57</a>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_8'>Ex. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN682"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_15"><span class="notemark">x</span> 19.15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_20'>ch. 2. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN683"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_15"><span class="notemark">t</span> 19.15</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_4'>Gen. 19. 4–8</a>. Comp. <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_8'>Ecclus. 16. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN684"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_16"><span class="notemark">u</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN41_55'>Gen. 41. 55–57</a>. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_8'>Ex. 1. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN685"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_16"><span class="notemark">y</span> 19.16</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN45_16'>Gen. 45. 16–20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN686"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_17"><span class="notemark">z</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_23'>Ex. 10. 23</a>. <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_2'>ch. 17. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN687"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_17"><span class="notemark">a</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='GEN.xhtml#GN19_11'>Gen. 19. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN688"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_17"><span class="notemark">b</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_6'>ch. 10. 6</a>. <a href='2PE.xhtml#P22_7'>2 Pet. 2. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN689"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_17"><span class="notemark">c</span> 19.17</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_17'>ch. 17. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN690"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. <span class='add'>by themselves</span>. So <a href='HEB.xhtml#HB1_3'>Heb. 1. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN691"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_18"><span class="notemark">cc</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_21'>Ecclus. 40. 21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN692"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_18"><span class="notemark">d</span> 19.18</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_19'>ver. 19–21</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN693"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_19"><span class="notemark">e</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_38'>Ex. 12. 38</a>. &amp; <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_29'>14. 29</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN694"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_19"><span class="notemark">f</span> 19.19</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_3'>Ex. 8. 3</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN695"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_20"><span class="notemark">g</span> 19.20</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_17'>ch. 16. 17</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN696"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_21"><span class="notemark">h</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_18'>ch. 16. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN697"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_21"><span class="notemark">i</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft"><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_22'>ch. 16. 22</a>, <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_23'>23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN698"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_21"><span class="notemark">k</span> 19.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Comp. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_14'>Ex. 16. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN699"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS19_22"><span class="notemark">l</span> 19.22</a>
 <span class="ft">So <a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_20'>ch. 12. 20</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>

