<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Zechariah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Zechariah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC14_0'>14</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='ZC0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Zechariah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="ZC1_1">1&#160;</span> In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Zechariah, the son of <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_2">2&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath been <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>sore displeased with your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Turn ye unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and I will turn unto you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_4">4&#160;</span> Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Turn ye now from your evil ways, and <span class='add'>from</span> your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_5">5&#160;</span> Your fathers, where <span class='add'>are</span> they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_6">6&#160;</span> But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Like as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he dealt with us.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which <span class='add'>is</span> the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_8">8&#160;</span> I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that <span class='add'>were</span> in the bottom; and behind him <span class='add'>were there</span> red horses, <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>speckled, and white.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_9">9&#160;</span> Then said I, O my lord, what <span class='add'>are</span> these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I will shew thee what these <span class='add'>be</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_10">10&#160;</span> And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These <span class='add'>are they</span> whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_11">11&#160;</span> And they answered the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that stood among the myrtle trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered and said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered the angel that talked with me <span class='add'>with</span> good words <span class='add'>and</span> comfortable words.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_14">14&#160;</span> So the angel that communed with me said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; I am <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_15">15&#160;</span> And I am very sore displeased with the heathen <span class='add'>that are</span> at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_17">17&#160;</span> Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; My cities through <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_19">19&#160;</span> And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What <span class='add'>be</span> these? And he answered me, These <span class='add'>are</span> the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shewed me four carpenters.
<span class="verse" id="ZC1_21">21&#160;</span> Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These <span class='add'>are</span> the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up <span class='add'>their</span> horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_1">1&#160;</span> I lifted up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_2">2&#160;</span> Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what <span class='add'>is</span> the breadth thereof, and what <span class='add'>is</span> the length thereof.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_3">3&#160;</span> And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_4">4&#160;</span> And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited <span class='add'>as</span> towns without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein:
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_5">5&#160;</span> For I, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Ho, ho, <span class='add'>come forth</span>, and flee from the land of the north, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_7">7&#160;</span> Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest <span class='add'>with</span> the daughter of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_8">8&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that <a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_9">9&#160;</span> For, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sent me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_11">11&#160;</span> And many nations shall be joined to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sent me unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_12">12&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.
<span class="verse" id="ZC2_13">13&#160;</span> Be silent, O all flesh, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he is raised up out of <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>his holy habitation.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_1">1&#160;</span> And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Satan standing at his right hand <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to resist him.
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Satan, <a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rebuke thee, O Satan; even the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: <span class='add'>is</span> not this a brand plucked out of the fire?
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_3">3&#160;</span> Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel.
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_4">4&#160;</span> And he answered and spake unto those that stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_5">5&#160;</span> And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood by.
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_6">6&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> protested unto Joshua, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_7">7&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>places to walk among these that stand by.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_8">8&#160;</span> Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy fellows that sit before thee: for they <span class='add'>are</span> <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>men wondered at: for, behold, I will bring forth my servant the <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>BRANCH.
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_9">9&#160;</span> For behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone <span class='add'>shall be</span> seven eyes: behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.
<span class="verse" id="ZC3_10">10&#160;</span> In that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig tree.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_1">1&#160;</span> And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep,
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_2">2&#160;</span> And said unto me, What seest thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick all <span class='add'>of</span> gold, <a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>seven pipes to the seven lamps, which <span class='add'>are</span> upon the top thereof:
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_3">3&#160;</span> And two olive trees by it, one upon the right <span class='add'>side</span> of the bowl, and the other upon the left <span class='add'>side</span> thereof.
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_4">4&#160;</span> So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, What <span class='add'>are</span> these, my lord?
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_5">5&#160;</span> Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord.
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_6">6&#160;</span> Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by <a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_7">7&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>art</span> thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel <span class='add'>thou shalt become</span> a plain: and he shall bring forth the headstone <span class='add'>thereof with</span> shoutings, <span class='add'>crying</span>, Grace, grace unto it.
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_8">8&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_9">9&#160;</span> The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shall also finish it; and thou shalt know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sent me unto you.
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_10">10&#160;</span> For who hath despised the day of small things? <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for they shall rejoice, and shall see the <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel <span class='add'>with</span> those seven; <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they <span class='add'>are</span> the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which run to and fro through the whole earth.<span class='nd'></span></div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then answered I, and said unto him, What <span class='add'>are</span> these two olive trees upon the right <span class='add'>side</span> of the candlestick and upon the left <span class='add'>side</span> thereof?
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_12">12&#160;</span> And I answered again, and said unto him, What <span class='add'>be these</span> two olive branches which <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>through the two golden pipes <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>empty <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the golden <span class='add'>oil</span> out of themselves?
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_13">13&#160;</span> And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these <span class='add'>be</span>? And I said, No, my lord.
<span class="verse" id="ZC4_14">14&#160;</span> Then said he, These <span class='add'>are</span> the two <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_1">1&#160;</span> Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_2">2&#160;</span> And he said unto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying roll; the length thereof <span class='add'>is</span> twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_3">3&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, This <span class='add'>is</span> the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth: for <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>every one that stealeth shall be cut off <span class='add'>as</span> on this side according to it; and every one that sweareth shall be cut off <span class='add'>as</span> on that side according to it.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_4">4&#160;</span> I will bring it forth, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what <span class='add'>is</span> this that goeth forth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_6">6&#160;</span> And I said, What <span class='add'>is</span> it? And he said, This <span class='add'>is</span> an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This <span class='add'>is</span> their resemblance through all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_7">7&#160;</span> And, behold, there was lifted up a <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>talent of lead: and this <span class='add'>is</span> a woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_8">8&#160;</span> And he said, This <span class='add'>is</span> wickedness. And he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_9">9&#160;</span> Then lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came out two women, and the wind <span class='add'>was</span> in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heaven.
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_10">10&#160;</span> Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah?
<span class="verse" id="ZC5_11">11&#160;</span> And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar: and it shall be established, and set there upon her own base.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_1">1&#160;</span> And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains; and the mountains <span class='add'>were</span> mountains of brass.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_2">2&#160;</span> In the first chariot <span class='add'>were</span> red horses; and in the second chariot black horses;
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_3">3&#160;</span> And in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot grisled and <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bay horses.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_4">4&#160;</span> Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, What <span class='add'>are</span> these, my lord?
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_5">5&#160;</span> And the angel answered and said unto me, These <span class='add'>are</span> the four <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_6">6&#160;</span> The black horses which <span class='add'>are</span> therein go forth into the north country; and the white go forth after them; and the grisled go forth toward the south country.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_7">7&#160;</span> And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_8">8&#160;</span> Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_10">10&#160;</span> Take of <span class='add'>them of</span> the captivity, <span class='add'>even</span> of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_11">11&#160;</span> Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set <span class='add'>them</span> upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest;
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_12">12&#160;</span> And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name <span class='add'>is</span> The <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>BRANCH; and he shall <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_13">13&#160;</span> Even he shall build the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_14">14&#160;</span> And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC6_15">15&#160;</span>And they <span class='add'>that are</span> far off shall come and build in the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and ye shall know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sent me unto you. And <span class='add'>this</span> shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, <span class='add'>that</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Zechariah in the fourth <span class='add'>day</span> of the ninth month, <span class='add'>even</span> in Chisleu;
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_2">2&#160;</span> When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regem-melech, and their men, <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to pray before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>,
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> to speak unto the priests which <span class='add'>were</span> in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_5">5&#160;</span> Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh <span class='add'>month</span>, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, <span class='add'>even</span> to me?
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_6">6&#160;</span> And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>did not ye eat <span class='add'>for yourselves</span>, and drink <span class='add'>for yourselves</span>?
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_7">7&#160;</span><a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a> <span class='add'>Should ye</span> not <span class='add'>hear</span> the words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath cried <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when <span class='add'>men</span> inhabited the south <a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>and the plain?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Zechariah, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_9">9&#160;</span> Thus speaketh the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, saying, <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compassions every man to his brother:
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_10">10&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_11">11&#160;</span> But they refused to hearken, and <a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pulled away the shoulder, and <a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>stopped their ears, that they should not hear.
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_12">12&#160;</span> Yea, they made their hearts <span class='add'>as</span> an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sent in his spirit <a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore it is come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> as he cried, and they would not hear; so <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>they cried, and I would not hear, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts:
<span class="verse" id="ZC7_14">14&#160;</span> But I scattered them with a whirlwind among all the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they laid the <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>pleasant land desolate.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_1">1&#160;</span> Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts came <span class='add'>to me</span>, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts the holy mountain.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_4">4&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand <a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>for very age.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_5">5&#160;</span> And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_6">6&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; If it be <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_7">7&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from <a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the west country;
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_8">8&#160;</span> And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which <span class='add'>were</span> in the day <span class='add'>that</span> the foundation of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_10">10&#160;</span> For before these days <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>there was no <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither <span class='add'>was there any</span> peace to him that went out or came in because of the affliction: for I set all men every one against his neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_11">11&#160;</span>But now I <span class='add'>will</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> unto the residue of this people as in the former days, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_12">12&#160;</span> For the seed <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these <span class='add'>things</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_13">13&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, <span class='add'>but</span> let your hands be strong.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_14">14&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and I repented not:
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_15">15&#160;</span> So again have I thought in these days to do well unto Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_16">16&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> the things that ye shall do; <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates:
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_17">17&#160;</span> And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all these <span class='add'>are things</span> that I hate, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts came unto me, saying,
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_19">19&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; The fast of the fourth <span class='add'>month</span>, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_20">20&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <span class='add'>It shall</span> yet <span class='add'>come to pass</span>, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities:
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_21">21&#160;</span> And the inhabitants of one <span class='add'>city</span> shall go to another, saying, <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Let us go <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>speedily <a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to pray before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: I will go also.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_22">22&#160;</span> Yea, many people and strong nations shall come to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC8_23">23&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; In those days <span class='add'>it shall come to pass</span>, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard <span class='add'>that</span> God <span class='add'>is</span> with you.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus <span class='add'>shall be</span> the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, <span class='add'>shall be</span> toward the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_2">2&#160;</span> And Hamath also shall border thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wise.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_3">3&#160;</span> And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_5">5&#160;</span> Ashkelon shall see <span class='add'>it</span>, and fear; Gaza also <span class='add'>shall see it</span>, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron; for her expectation shall be ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_6">6&#160;</span> And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_7">7&#160;</span> And I will take away his <a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth: but he that remaineth, even he, <span class='add'>shall be</span> for our God, and he shall be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_8">8&#160;</span> And I will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of him that passeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now have I seen with mine eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_9">9&#160;</span>¶ <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: he <span class='add'>is</span> just, and <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_10">10&#160;</span> And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off: and he shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion <span class='add'>shall be</span> <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>from sea <span class='add'>even</span> to sea, and from the river <span class='add'>even</span> to the ends of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_11">11&#160;</span> As for thee also, <a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth thy <a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prisoners out of the pit wherein <span class='add'>is</span> no water.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare <span class='add'>that</span> I will render double unto thee;
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_13">13&#160;</span> When I have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_15">15&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour, and <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, <span class='add'>and</span> make a noise as through wine; and they <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall be filled like bowls, <span class='add'>and</span> as the corners of the altar.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_16">16&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God shall save them in that day as the flock of his people: for they <span class='add'>shall be as</span> the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land.
<span class="verse" id="ZC9_17">17&#160;</span>For how great <span class='add'>is</span> his goodness, and how great <span class='add'>is</span> his beauty! corn shall make the young men <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cheerful, and new wine the maids.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_1">1&#160;</span> Ask ye of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> rain in the time of the latter rain; <span class='add'>so</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall make <a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the field.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_2">2&#160;</span> For the <a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they <a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>were troubled, because <span class='add'>there was</span> no shepherd.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_3">3&#160;</span> Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I <a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punished the goats: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in the battle.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_4">4&#160;</span> Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the battle bow, out of him every oppressor together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And they shall be as mighty <span class='add'>men</span>, which tread down <span class='add'>their enemies</span> in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with them, and <a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the riders on horses shall be confounded.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_6">6&#160;</span> And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and will hear them.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>they of</span> Ephraim shall be like a mighty <span class='add'>man</span>, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see <span class='add'>it</span>, and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_8">8&#160;</span> I will hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have increased.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_9">9&#160;</span> And I will sow them among the people: and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and turn again.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_10">10&#160;</span> I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and <span class='add'>place</span> shall not be found for them.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_11">11&#160;</span> And he shall pass through the sea with affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away.
<span class="verse" id="ZC10_12">12&#160;</span> And I will strengthen them in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_1">1&#160;</span> Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_2">2&#160;</span> Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>the <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for <a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the forest of the vintage is come down.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_3">3&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>There is</span> a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of Jordan is spoiled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_4">4&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God; Feed the flock of the slaughter;
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_5">5&#160;</span> Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_6">6&#160;</span> For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but, lo, I will <a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>deliver the men every one into his neighbour’s hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_7">7&#160;</span> And I will feed the flock of slaughter, <a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><span class='add'>even</span> you, O poor of the flock. And I took unto me two staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I called <a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Bands; and I fed the flock.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_8">8&#160;</span> Three shepherds also I cut off in one month; and my soul <a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>lothed them, and their soul also abhorred me.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_9">9&#160;</span> Then said I, I will not feed you: <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>that that dieth, let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; and let the rest eat every one the flesh <a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>of another.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And I took my staff, <span class='add'>even</span> Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the people.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_11">11&#160;</span> And it was broken in that day: and <a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it <span class='add'>was</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_12">12&#160;</span> And I said unto them, <a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>If ye think good, give <span class='add'>me</span> my price; and if not, forbear. So they <a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>weighed for my price thirty <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Cast it unto the <a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>potter: a goodly price that I was prised at of them. And I took the thirty <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_14">14&#160;</span> Then I cut asunder mine other staff, <span class='add'>even</span> <a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Take unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_16">16&#160;</span> For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, <span class='add'>which</span> shall not visit those that be <a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor <a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>feed that that standeth still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces.
<span class="verse" id="ZC11_17">17&#160;</span><a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Woe to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_2">2&#160;</span> Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of <a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>trembling unto all the people round about, <a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>when they shall be in the siege both against Judah <span class='add'>and</span> against Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_4">4&#160;</span> In that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness: and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with blindness.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_5">5&#160;</span> And the governors of Judah shall say in their heart, <a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>The inhabitants of Jerusalem <span class='add'>shall be</span> my strength in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts their God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_6">6&#160;</span>¶ In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, <span class='add'>even</span> in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_7">7&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify <span class='add'>themselves</span> against Judah.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_8">8&#160;</span> In that day shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is <a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>feeble among them at that day shall be as David; and the house of David <span class='add'>shall be</span> as God, as the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_10">10&#160;</span> And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications: and they shall <a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for <span class='add'>his</span> only <span class='add'>son</span>, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for <span class='add'>his</span> firstborn.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_11">11&#160;</span> In that day shall there be a great <a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>mourning in Jerusalem, <a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_12">12&#160;</span> And the land shall mourn, <a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart;
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_13">13&#160;</span> The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart;
<span class="verse" id="ZC12_14">14&#160;</span> All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_1">1&#160;</span> In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>uncleanness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, <span class='add'>that</span> I will <a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_3">3&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_4">4&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither shall they wear <a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>a rough garment <a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>to deceive:
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_5">5&#160;</span> But he shall say, I <span class='add'>am</span> no prophet, I <span class='add'>am</span> an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_6">6&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> shall say unto him, What <span class='add'>are</span> these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, <span class='add'>Those</span> with which I was wounded <span class='add'>in</span> the house of my friends. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man <span class='add'>that is</span> my fellow, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: <a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_8">8&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> in all the land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, two parts therein shall be cut off <span class='add'>and</span> die; but the third shall be left therein.
<span class="verse" id="ZC13_9">9&#160;</span> And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will <a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It <span class='add'>is</span> my people: and they shall say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> my God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZC14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_1">1&#160;</span> Behold, the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_2">2&#160;</span> For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_3">3&#160;</span> Then shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which <span class='add'>is</span> before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, <span class='add'>and there shall be</span> a very great valley; and half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_5">5&#160;</span> And ye shall flee <span class='add'>to</span> the valley of <a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>the mountains; <a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the <a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God shall come, <span class='add'>and</span> all the saints with thee.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_6">6&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> the light shall not be <a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>clear, <span class='add'>nor</span> <a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>dark:
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_7">7&#160;</span> But <a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>it shall be <a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>one day which shall be known to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> at <a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>evening time it shall be light.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_8">8&#160;</span> And it shall be in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> living <a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the <a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall it be.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there be one <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his name one.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_10">10&#160;</span> All the land shall be <a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and <a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>inhabited in her place, from Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate, and <span class='add'>from</span> the tower of Hananeel unto the king’s winepresses.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_11">11&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>men</span> shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem <a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>shall be safely inhabited.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And this shall be the plague wherewith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_13">13&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> a great tumult from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be among them; and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_14">14&#160;</span> And <a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>Judah also shall fight <a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_15">15&#160;</span> And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the beasts that shall be in these tents, as this plague. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> every one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_17">17&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> whoso will not come up of <span class='add'>all</span> the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_18">18&#160;</span> And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, <a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>that <span class='add'>have</span> no <span class='add'>rain;</span> there shall be the plague, wherewith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_19">19&#160;</span> This shall be the <a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_20">20&#160;</span>¶ In that day shall there be upon the <a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the pots in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house shall be like the bowls before the altar.
<span class="verse" id="ZC14_21">21&#160;</span> Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them, and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the <a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Canaanite in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_1"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 Barachiah]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with displeasure.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Mal. <a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_7'>3. 7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS31_6'>31 6</a> Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR3_12'>3 12</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_11'>18 11</a> Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_30'>18 30</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS14_1'>14. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, overtake</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Lam <a href='LAM.xhtml#LM1_18'>1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bay.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC8_2'>8. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC1_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. good.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC2_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT32_10'>32 10</a> Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS17_8'>17 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC2_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS12_6'>12. 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_1'>54. 1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC2_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Lev. <a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_12'>26 12</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK37_27'>37. 27</a>. 2 Cor. <a href='2CO.xhtml#C26_16'>6. 16</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC2_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the habitation of his holiness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">That is, an adversary</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb to be his adversary.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Jude <a href='JUD.xhtml#JD1_9'>9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, ordinance.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. walks.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. men of wonder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC3_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_1'>11. 1</a>. Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_5'>23. 5</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR33_15'>33. 15</a>. ch <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC6_12'>6. 12</a>. Luke <a href='LUK.xhtml#LK1_78'>1. 78</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. with her bowl.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, seven several pipes to the lamps, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, army.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">sith the seven eyes of the <span class="nd">Lord</span> shall rejoice.</span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. stone of tin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC3_9'>3. 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, empty out of themselves oil into the gold</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the gold.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC4_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sons of oil.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC5_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, everyone of this people that stealeth holdeth himself guiltless, as it doth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC5_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 5.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, weighty piece.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC6_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, strong.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC6_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, winds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC6_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">ch <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC3_8'>3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC6_12"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 6.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, branch up from under him.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">to intreat the face of the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_5'>58. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, be not ye they that, &amp;c</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Are not these the words.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7.7</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 of]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. Judge judgment of truth.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ex. <a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_21'>22. 21</a>. Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_23'>1 23</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_28'>5. 28</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. they gave a back-sliding shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. made heavy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. by the hand of</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_28'>1. 28</a>. Is <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_15'>1 15</a>. Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_11'>11. 11</a>. &amp;c <a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_12'>14. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC7_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. land of desire</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.2</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC1_14'>1. 14</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. for multitude of days.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hard, or, difficult.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the country of the going down of the sun.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the hire of man became nothing, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Hag. <a href='HAG.xhtml#HG1_6'>1. 6</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb of peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Eph <a href='EPH.xhtml#EP4_25'>4. 25</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. judge truth, and the judgment of peace.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, solemn, or, set times.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_3'>2. 3</a>. Mic. 4. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_1'>1</a>, <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_2'>2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_21"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, continually.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. going.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC8_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. <span class="add">to intreat the face of the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK28_3'>28 3</a>, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. bloods.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_11'>62. 11</a>. Matt <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_5'>21 5</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_15'>12. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_9"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, saving himself.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Ps <a href='PSA.xhtml#PS72_8'>72. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, whose covenant is by blood.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_1'>61. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, subdue the stones of the sling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_15"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall fill both the bowls, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC9_17"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 9.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, grow, or, speak</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC10_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, lightnings.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC10_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_8'>10. 8</a> Hab. <a href='HAB.xhtml#HK3_18'>3. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC10_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. teraphims.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC10_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, answered that, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC10_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visited upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC10_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 10.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, they shall make the riderson horses ashamed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_2"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 all the mighty]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gallants.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the defenced forest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make to be found.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, verily the poor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Binders.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. was straitened for them.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR15_2'>15. 2</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of his fellow, or, neighbour.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the poor of the flock, &amp;c. certainly knew.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. If it be good in your eyes.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_15'>26. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_9'>27 9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, Binders</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, hidden.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 11.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bear.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC11_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer <a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_1'>23. 1</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK34_2'>34 2</a>. John <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_12'>10. 12</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, slumber, or, poison.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, and also against Judah shall he be which shall be in siege against Jerusalem.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, There is strength to me and to the inhabitants, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, abject.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. fallen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.10</a>
 <span class="ft">John 19. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_34'>34</a>. <a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_37'>37</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_7'>1. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Acts <a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_37'>2. 37</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12.11</a>
 <span class="ft">2 Chr. <a href='2CH.xhtml#R235_24'>35 24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC12_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. families, families.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC13_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. separation for uncleanness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC13_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK30_13'>30 13</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC13_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. a garment of hair.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC13_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. to lie.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC13_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Matt. <a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_31'>26. 31</a>. Mark <a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_27'>14. 27</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC13_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13.9</a>
 <span class="ft">1 Pet. 1. <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_6'>6</a>, <a href='1PE.xhtml#P11_7'>7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, my mountains.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when he shall touch the valley of the mountains to the place he separated.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM1_1'>1. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. precious.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. thickness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, the day shall be one.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_5'>22. 5</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_19'>60. 19</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_23'>21. 23</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK47_1'>47. 1</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_18'>3. 18</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_1'>22. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_8"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, eastern.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, compassed.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_10"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.10</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall abide.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_11"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, shall abide.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, thou also, O Judah, shalt.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, against.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. upon whom there is not.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_19"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, sin</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_20"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 14.20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, bridles.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZC14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14.21</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_8'>35. 8</a> Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL3_17'>3. 17</a>. Rev. <a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_27'>21. 27</a>. &amp;c <a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_15'>22. 15</a>.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
