<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>HOLY BIBLE Zephaniah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Zephaniah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP3_0'>3</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='ZP0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Zephaniah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZP1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="ZP1_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_2">2&#160;</span><a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> I will utterly consume all <span class='add'>things</span> from off <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_3">3&#160;</span> I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the <a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>stumblingblocks with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_4">4&#160;</span> I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, <span class='add'>and</span> the name of the Chemarims with the priests;
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_5">5&#160;</span> And them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that worship <span class='add'>and</span> that swear <a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and that swear by Malcham;<span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_6">6&#160;</span> And them that are turned back from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and <span class='add'>those</span> that have not sought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor enquired for him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_7">7&#160;</span> Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: for the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> at hand: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath <a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>bid his guests.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_8">8&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> sacrifice, that I will <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>punish the princes, and the king’s children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_9">9&#160;</span> In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters’ houses with violence and deceit.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_10">10&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>that there shall be</span> the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hills.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_11">11&#160;</span> Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_12">12&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass at that time, <span class='add'>that</span> I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>settled on their lees: that say in their heart, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not do good, neither will he do evil.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: they shall also build houses, but <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>not inhabit <span class='add'>them;</span> and they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_14">14&#160;</span> The great day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> near, <span class='add'>it is</span> near, and hasteth greatly, <span class='add'>even</span> the voice of the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_15">15&#160;</span> That day <span class='add'>is</span> a day of <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_16">16&#160;</span> A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_17">17&#160;</span> And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung.
<span class="verse" id="ZP1_18">18&#160;</span><a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> wrath; but the whole land shall be <a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZP2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_1">1&#160;</span> Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>not desired;
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_2">2&#160;</span> Before the decree bring forth, <span class='add'>before</span> the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> come upon you, before the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anger come upon you.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_3">3&#160;</span> Seek ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_4">4&#160;</span>¶ For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_5">5&#160;</span> Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> against you; O Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_6">6&#160;</span> And the sea coast shall be dwellings <span class='add'>and</span> cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_7">7&#160;</span> And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they shall feed thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening: <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_8">8&#160;</span>¶ I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified <span class='add'>themselves</span> against their border.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, <span class='add'>even</span> the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_10">10&#160;</span> This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified <span class='add'>themselves</span> against the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_11">11&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>will be</span> terrible unto them: for he will <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>famish all the gods of the earth; and <span class='add'>men</span> shall worship him, every one from his place, <span class='add'>even</span> all the isles of the heathen.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Ye Ethiopians also, ye <span class='add'>shall be</span> slain by my sword.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_13">13&#160;</span> And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, <span class='add'>and</span> dry like a wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_14">14&#160;</span> And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: both the <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>upper lintels of it; <span class='add'>their</span> voice shall sing in the windows; desolation <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the thresholds: <a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>for he shall uncover the cedar work.
<span class="verse" id="ZP2_15">15&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>I <span class='add'>am</span>, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none beside me: how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth by her shall hiss, <span class='add'>and</span> wag his hand.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ZP3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a><a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city!
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_2">2&#160;</span> She obeyed not the voice; she received not <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>correction; she trusted not in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; she drew not near to her God.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_3">3&#160;</span><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Her princes within her <span class='add'>are</span> roaring lions; her judges <span class='add'>are</span> evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_4">4&#160;</span> Her <a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>prophets <span class='add'>are</span> light <span class='add'>and</span> treacherous persons: her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done <a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>violence to the law.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_5">5&#160;</span> The just <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity: <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_6">6&#160;</span> I have cut off the nations: their <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>towers are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_7">7&#160;</span> I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early, <span class='add'>and</span> corrupted all their doings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination <span class='add'>is</span> to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, <span class='add'>even</span> all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>jealousy.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_9">9&#160;</span> For then will I turn to the people a pure <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>language, that they may all call upon the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to serve him with one <a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>consent.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_10">10&#160;</span> From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, <span class='add'>even</span> the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_11">11&#160;</span> In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou hast transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty <a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>because of <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>my holy mountain.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_12">12&#160;</span> I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_13">13&#160;</span> The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make <span class='add'>them</span> afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Sing, O <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_15">15&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the king of Israel, <span class='add'>even</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of thee: thou shalt not see evil any more.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_16">16&#160;</span> In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: <span class='add'>and to</span> Zion, Let not thine hands be <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>∥</a>slack.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_17">17&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God in the midst of thee <span class='add'>is</span> mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_18">18&#160;</span> I will gather <span class='add'>them that are</span> sorrowful for the solemn assembly, <span class='add'>who</span> are of thee, <span class='add'>to whom</span> <a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the reproach of it <span class='add'>was</span> a burden.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_19">19&#160;</span> Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee: and I will save her that <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>I will get them praise and fame in every land <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>where they have been put to shame.
<span class="verse" id="ZP3_20">20&#160;</span> At that time will I bring you <span class='add'>again</span>, even in the time that I gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. By taking away I will make an end.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb the face of the land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_3"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, idols.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_5"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, <span class="add">to the <span class="nd">Lord.</span></span></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. sanctified, or, prepared.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. visit upon.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. curded, or, thickened.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">Deut. 28, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_30'>30</a>, <a href='DEU.xhtml#DT28_39'>39</a> Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_11'>5. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_7'>30. 7</a>. Joel <a href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_11'>2. 11</a>. Amos <a href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_18'>5. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Prov. <a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_4'>11. 4</a>. Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK7_19'>7. 19</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP3_8'>3. 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, not desirous.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_7"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when, &amp;c.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. make lean.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, pelican.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_11'>34. 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, knops, or, chapiters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_14"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 2.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, when he hath uncovered.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP2_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_8'>47 8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_1"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, gluttonous</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. craw.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_2"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, instruction.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_27'>22. 27</a>. Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC3_11'>3 11</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Jer. <a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_11'>23. 11</a>. Hos. <a href='HOS.xhtml#HS9_7'>9 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Ezek. <a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_26'>22. 26</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. morning by morning.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_6"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, corners.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">ch. <a href='ZEP.xhtml#ZP1_18'>1. 18</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. lip.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. shoulder.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb in my holy.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">[1611 mine]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">Is. <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS12_6'>12 6</a>. &amp;c <a href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_1'>54. 1</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_16"><span class="notemark">∥</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, faint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb he will be silent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. the burden upon it was reproach</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Mic. <a href='MIC.xhtml#MC4_7'>4. 7</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. I will set them for a praise.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ZP3_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Heb. of their shame.</span></p></aside>
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
