<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Jeremiah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Jeremiah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_0'>51</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR52_0'>52</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JR1_1">1&#160;</span> The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that <span class='add'>were</span> in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin: 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_2">2&#160;</span> To whom the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_3">3&#160;</span> It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_4">4&#160;</span> Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_5">5&#160;</span> Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, <span class='add'>and</span> I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.
<span class="verse" id="JR1_6">6&#160;</span> Then said I, Ah, Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! behold, I cannot speak: for I <span class='add'>am</span> a child. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Say not, I <span class='add'>am</span> a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_8">8&#160;</span> Be not afraid of their faces: for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee to deliver thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_9">9&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_10">10&#160;</span> See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_12">12&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, Thou hast well seen: for I will hasten my word to perform it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_13">13&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me the second time, saying, What seest thou? And I said, I see a seething pot; and the face thereof <span class='add'>is</span> toward the north.
<span class="verse" id="JR1_14">14&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Out of the north an evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.
<span class="verse" id="JR1_15">15&#160;</span> For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they shall come, and they shall set every one his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_16">16&#160;</span> And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.
<span class="verse" id="JR1_18">18&#160;</span> For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an iron pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_19">19&#160;</span> And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail against thee; for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to deliver thee.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_2">2&#160;</span> Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land <span class='add'>that was</span> not sown.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_3">3&#160;</span> Israel <span class='add'>was</span> holiness unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> the firstfruits of his increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_4">4&#160;</span> Hear ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_6">6&#160;</span> Neither said they, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt? 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_7">7&#160;</span> And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_8">8&#160;</span> The priests said not, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? and they that handle the law knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after <span class='add'>things that</span> do not profit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and with your children’s children will I plead. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_10">10&#160;</span> For pass over the isles of Chittim, and see; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_11">11&#160;</span> Hath a nation changed <span class='add'>their</span> gods, which <span class='add'>are</span> yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for <span class='add'>that which</span> doth not profit. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_12">12&#160;</span> Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_13">13&#160;</span> For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, <span class='add'>and</span> hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Is</span> Israel a servant? <span class='add'>is</span> he a homeborn <span class='add'>slave</span>? why is he spoiled?
<span class="verse" id="JR2_15">15&#160;</span> The young lions roared upon him, <span class='add'>and</span> yelled, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_16">16&#160;</span> Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy head.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_17">17&#160;</span> Hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, when he led thee by the way? 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_18">18&#160;</span> And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the river? 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_19">19&#160;</span> Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that <span class='add'>it is</span> an evil <span class='add'>thing</span> and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and that my fear <span class='add'>is</span> not in thee, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_20">20&#160;</span>¶ For of old time I have broken thy yoke, <span class='add'>and</span> burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon every high hill and under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_21">21&#160;</span> Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_22">22&#160;</span> For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, <span class='add'>yet</span> thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_23">23&#160;</span> How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after Baalim? see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: <span class='add'>thou art</span> a swift dromedary traversing her ways;
<span class="verse" id="JR2_24">24&#160;</span> A wild ass used to the wilderness, <span class='add'>that</span> snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary themselves; in her month they shall find her.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_25">25&#160;</span> Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_26">26&#160;</span> As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets, 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_27">27&#160;</span> Saying to a stock, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth: for they have turned <span class='add'>their</span> back unto me, and not <span class='add'>their</span> face: but in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_28">28&#160;</span>But where <span class='add'>are</span> thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for <span class='add'>according to</span> the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_29">29&#160;</span> Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_30">30&#160;</span> In vain have I smitten your children; they received no correction: your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_31">31&#160;</span>¶ O generation, see ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people, We are lords; we will come no more unto thee?
<span class="verse" id="JR2_32">32&#160;</span> Can a maid forget her ornaments, <span class='add'>or</span> a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me days without number. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_33">33&#160;</span> Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_34">34&#160;</span> Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor innocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.
<span class="verse" id="JR2_35">35&#160;</span> Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Behold, I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I have not sinned. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_36">36&#160;</span> Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_37">37&#160;</span> Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_1">1&#160;</span> They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man’s, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_2">2&#160;</span> Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou hast not been lien with. In the ways hast thou sat for them, as the Arabian in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there hath been no latter rain; and thou hadst a whore’s forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_4">4&#160;</span> Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou <span class='add'>art</span> the guide of my youth? 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_5">5&#160;</span> Will he reserve <span class='add'>his anger</span> for ever? will he keep <span class='add'>it</span> to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_6">6&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast thou seen <span class='add'>that</span> which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played the harlot. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_7">7&#160;</span> And I said after she had done all these <span class='add'>things</span>, Turn thou unto me. But she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_8">8&#160;</span> And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_9">9&#160;</span> And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with stocks.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_10">10&#160;</span> And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; <span class='add'>and</span> I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I <span class='add'>am</span> merciful, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> I will not keep <span class='add'>anger</span> for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_13">13&#160;</span> Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_14">14&#160;</span> Turn, O backsliding children, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion: 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_15">15&#160;</span> And I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_16">16&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, they shall say no more, The ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: neither shall it come to mind: neither shall they remember it; neither shall they visit <span class='add'>it;</span> neither shall <span class='add'>that</span> be done any more.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_17">17&#160;</span> At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after the imagination of their evil heart.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_18">18&#160;</span> In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_19">19&#160;</span> But I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Surely <span class='add'>as</span> a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR3_21">21&#160;</span> A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping <span class='add'>and</span> supplications of the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, <span class='add'>and</span> they have forgotten the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_22">22&#160;</span> Return, ye backsliding children, <span class='add'>and</span> I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come unto thee; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_23">23&#160;</span> Truly in vain <span class='add'>is salvation hoped for</span> from the hills, <span class='add'>and from</span> the multitude of mountains: truly in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God <span class='add'>is</span> the salvation of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_24">24&#160;</span> For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_25">25&#160;</span> We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for we have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_1">1&#160;</span> If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, return unto me: and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_2">2&#160;</span> And thou shalt swear, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him shall they glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_3">3&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_4">4&#160;</span> Circumcise yourselves to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench <span class='add'>it</span>, because of the evil of your doings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_5">5&#160;</span> Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, Assemble yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_6">6&#160;</span> Set up the standard toward Zion: retire, stay not: for I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.
<span class="verse" id="JR4_7">7&#160;</span> The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate; <span class='add'>and</span> thy cities shall be laid waste, without an inhabitant. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_8">8&#160;</span> For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is not turned back from us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>that</span> the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_10">10&#160;</span> Then said I, Ah, Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! surely thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace; whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_11">11&#160;</span> At that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> a full wind from those <span class='add'>places</span> shall come unto me: now also will I give sentence against them.
<span class="verse" id="JR4_13">13&#160;</span> Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots <span class='add'>shall be</span> as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we are spoiled. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_14">14&#160;</span> O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_15">15&#160;</span> For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth affliction from mount Ephraim. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_16">16&#160;</span> Make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against Jerusalem, <span class='add'>that</span> watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_17">17&#160;</span> As keepers of a field, are they against her round about; because she hath been rebellious against me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_18">18&#160;</span> Thy way and thy doings have procured these <span class='add'>things</span> unto thee; this <span class='add'>is</span> thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto thine heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_19">19&#160;</span>¶ My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.
<span class="verse" id="JR4_20">20&#160;</span> Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, <span class='add'>and</span> my curtains in a moment. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_21">21&#160;</span> How long shall I see the standard, <span class='add'>and</span> hear the sound of the trumpet? 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_22">22&#160;</span> For my people <span class='add'>is</span> foolish, they have not known me; they <span class='add'>are</span> sottish children, and they have none understanding: they <span class='add'>are</span> wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_23">23&#160;</span> I beheld the earth, and, lo, <span class='add'>it was</span> without form, and void; and the heavens, and they <span class='add'>had</span> no light. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_24">24&#160;</span> I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills moved lightly. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_25">25&#160;</span> I beheld, and, lo, <span class='add'>there was</span> no man, and all the birds of the heavens were fled. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_26">26&#160;</span> I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place <span class='add'>was</span> a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> by his fierce anger. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_27">27&#160;</span> For thus hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, The whole land shall be desolate; yet will I not make a full end. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_28">28&#160;</span> For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black: because I have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, I have purposed <span class='add'>it</span>, and will not repent, neither will I turn back from it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_29">29&#160;</span> The whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks: every city <span class='add'>shall be</span> forsaken, and not a man dwell therein. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_30">30&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> thou <span class='add'>art</span> spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; <span class='add'>thy</span> lovers will despise thee, they will seek thy life.
<span class="verse" id="JR4_31">31&#160;</span> For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, <span class='add'>and</span> the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, <span class='add'>that</span> bewaileth herself, <span class='add'>that</span> spreadeth her hands, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Woe <span class='add'>is</span> me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_1">1&#160;</span> Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be <span class='add'>any</span> that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I will pardon it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_2">2&#160;</span> And though they say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth; surely they swear falsely. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_3">3&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>are</span> not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, <span class='add'>but</span> they have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore I said, Surely these <span class='add'>are</span> poor; they are foolish: for they know not the way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>nor</span> the judgment of their God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_5">5&#160;</span> I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for they have known the way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> the judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, <span class='add'>and</span> burst the bonds. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, <span class='add'>and</span> a wolf of the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces: because their transgressions are many, <span class='add'>and</span> their backslidings are increased.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_7">7&#160;</span>¶ How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by <span class='add'>them that are</span> no gods: when I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots’ houses. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_8">8&#160;</span>They were <span class='add'>as</span> fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbour’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_9">9&#160;</span> Shall I not visit for these <span class='add'>things</span>? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her battlements; for they <span class='add'>are</span> not the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_11">11&#160;</span> For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_12">12&#160;</span> They have belied the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, <span class='add'>It is</span> not he; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine: 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_13">13&#160;</span> And the prophets shall become wind, and the word <span class='add'>is</span> not in them: thus shall it be done unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_14">14&#160;</span> Wherefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_15">15&#160;</span> Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> a mighty nation, it <span class='add'>is</span> an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they say. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_16">16&#160;</span> Their quiver <span class='add'>is</span> as an open sepulchre, they <span class='add'>are</span> all mighty men. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_17">17&#160;</span> And they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, <span class='add'>which</span> thy sons and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and thine herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_18">18&#160;</span> Nevertheless in those days, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will not make a full end with you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Wherefore doeth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God all these <span class='add'>things</span> unto us? then shalt thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land <span class='add'>that is</span> not yours. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_20">20&#160;</span> Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_21">21&#160;</span> Hear now this, O foolish people, and without understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not:
<span class="verse" id="JR5_22">22&#160;</span> Fear ye not me? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: will ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand <span class='add'>for</span> the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it? 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_23">23&#160;</span> But this people hath a revolting and a rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_24">24&#160;</span> Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Your iniquities have turned away these <span class='add'>things</span>, and your sins have withholden good <span class='add'>things</span> from you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_26">26&#160;</span> For among my people are found wicked <span class='add'>men:</span> they lay wait, as he that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.
<span class="verse" id="JR5_27">27&#160;</span> As a cage is full of birds, so <span class='add'>are</span> their houses full of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen rich.
<span class="verse" id="JR5_28">28&#160;</span> They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_29">29&#160;</span> Shall I not visit for these <span class='add'>things</span>? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_30">30&#160;</span>¶ A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land;
<span class="verse" id="JR5_31">31&#160;</span> The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love <span class='add'>to have it</span> so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_1">1&#160;</span> O ye children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flee out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in Beth-haccerem: for evil appeareth out of the north, and great destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_2">2&#160;</span> I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate <span class='add'>woman</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR6_3">3&#160;</span> The shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her; they shall pitch <span class='add'>their</span> tents against her round about; they shall feed every one in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_4">4&#160;</span> Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. Woe unto us! for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_5">5&#160;</span> Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_6">6&#160;</span>¶ For thus hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts said, Hew ye down trees, and cast a mount against Jerusalem: this <span class='add'>is</span> the city to be visited; she <span class='add'>is</span> wholly oppression in the midst of her.
<span class="verse" id="JR6_7">7&#160;</span> As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her; before me continually <span class='add'>is</span> grief and wounds. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_8">8&#160;</span> Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee; lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, They shall throughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer into the baskets. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_10">10&#160;</span> To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear? behold, their ear <span class='add'>is</span> uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_11">11&#160;</span> Therefore I am full of the fury of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I am weary with holding in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly of young men together: for even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with <span class='add'>him that is</span> full of days. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_12">12&#160;</span> And their houses shall be turned unto others, <span class='add'>with their</span> fields and wives together: for I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_13">13&#160;</span> For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one <span class='add'>is</span> given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_14">14&#160;</span> They have healed also the hurt <span class='add'> of the daughter</span> of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when <span class='add'>there is</span> no peace.
<span class="verse" id="JR6_15">15&#160;</span> Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shall fall among them that fall: at the time <span class='add'>that</span> I visit them they shall be cast down, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_16">16&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where <span class='add'>is</span> the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk <span class='add'>therein</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_17">17&#160;</span> Also I set watchmen over you, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what <span class='add'>is</span> among them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_19">19&#160;</span> Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, <span class='add'>even</span> the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_20">20&#160;</span> To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? your burnt offerings <span class='add'>are</span> not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_21">21&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall upon them; the neighbour and his friend shall perish. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_22">22&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, a people cometh from the north country, and a great nation shall be raised from the sides of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_23">23&#160;</span> They shall lay hold on bow and spear; they <span class='add'>are</span> cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses, set in array as men for war against thee, O daughter of Zion. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_24">24&#160;</span> We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax feeble: anguish hath taken hold of us, <span class='add'>and</span> pain, as of a woman in travail. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_25">25&#160;</span> Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword of the enemy <span class='add'>and</span> fear <span class='add'>is</span> on every side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_26">26&#160;</span>¶ O daughter of my people, gird <span class='add'>thee</span> with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, <span class='add'>as for</span> an only son, most bitter lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_27">27&#160;</span> I have set thee <span class='add'>for</span> a tower <span class='add'>and</span> a fortress among my people, that thou mayest know and try their way. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_28">28&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> all grievous revolters, walking with slanders: <span class='add'>they are</span> brass and iron; they <span class='add'>are</span> all corrupters. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_29">29&#160;</span> The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_30">30&#160;</span> Reprobate silver shall <span class='add'>men</span> call them, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath rejected them.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_2">2&#160;</span> Stand in the gate of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all <span class='add'>ye of</span> Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_4">4&#160;</span> Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>are</span> these. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_5">5&#160;</span> For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour; 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt: 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_7">7&#160;</span> Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_9">9&#160;</span> Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not; 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_10">10&#160;</span> And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations?
<span class="verse" id="JR7_11">11&#160;</span> Is this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, even I have seen <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_12">12&#160;</span> But go ye now unto my place which <span class='add'>was</span> in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_13">13&#160;</span> And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I called you, but ye answered not; 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore will I do unto <span class='add'>this</span> house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_15">15&#160;</span> And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren, <span class='add'>even</span> the whole seed of Ephraim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_18">18&#160;</span> The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead <span class='add'>their</span> dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.
<span class="verse" id="JR7_19">19&#160;</span> Do they provoke me to anger? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>do they</span> not <span class='add'>provoke</span> themselves to the confusion of their own faces? 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_22">22&#160;</span> For I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices:
<span class="verse" id="JR7_23">23&#160;</span> But this thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_24">24&#160;</span> But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels <span class='add'>and</span> in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.
<span class="verse" id="JR7_25">25&#160;</span> Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending <span class='add'>them:</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_26">26&#160;</span> Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: they did worse than their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_27">27&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not answer thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_28">28&#160;</span> But thou shalt say unto them, This <span class='add'>is</span> a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, nor receiveth correction: truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Cut off thine hair, <span class='add'>O Jerusalem</span>, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_30">30&#160;</span> For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: they have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to pollute it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_31">31&#160;</span> And they have built the high places of Tophet, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded <span class='add'>them</span> not, neither came it into my heart.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that it shall no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_33">33&#160;</span> And the carcases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall fray <span class='add'>them</span> away. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_34">34&#160;</span> Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land shall be desolate.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_1">1&#160;</span> At that time, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves: 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_2">2&#160;</span> And they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped: they shall not be gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_3">3&#160;</span> And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family, which remain in all the places whither I have driven them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Shall they fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return? 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_5">5&#160;</span>Why <span class='add'>then</span> is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_6">6&#160;</span> I hearkened and heard, <span class='add'>but</span> they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_7">7&#160;</span> Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_8">8&#160;</span> How do ye say, We <span class='add'>are</span> wise, and the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he <span class='add'>it;</span> the pen of the scribes <span class='add'>is</span> in vain.
<span class="verse" id="JR8_9">9&#160;</span> The wise <span class='add'>men</span> are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and what wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> in them?
<span class="verse" id="JR8_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore will I give their wives unto others, <span class='add'>and</span> their fields to them that shall inherit <span class='add'>them:</span> for every one from the least even unto the greatest is given to covetousness, from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_11">11&#160;</span> For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when <span class='add'>there is</span> no peace. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_12">12&#160;</span> Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall they fall among them that fall: in the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_13">13&#160;</span>¶ I will surely consume them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>there shall be</span> no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade; and <span class='add'>the things that</span> I have given them shall pass away from them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_14">14&#160;</span> Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR8_15">15&#160;</span> We looked for peace, but no good <span class='add'>came; and</span> for a time of health, and behold trouble! 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_16">16&#160;</span> The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.
<span class="verse" id="JR8_17">17&#160;</span> For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which <span class='add'>will</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_18">18&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>When</span> I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart <span class='add'>is</span> faint in me.
<span class="verse" id="JR8_19">19&#160;</span> Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because of them that dwell in a far country: <span class='add'>Is</span> not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Zion? <span class='add'>is</span> not her king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, <span class='add'>and</span> with strange vanities?
<span class="verse" id="JR8_20">20&#160;</span> The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_21">21&#160;</span> For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is there</span> no balm in Gilead; <span class='add'>is there</span> no physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_1">1&#160;</span> Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!
<span class="verse" id="JR9_2">2&#160;</span> Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they <span class='add'>be</span> all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_3">3&#160;</span> And they bend their tongues <span class='add'>like</span> their bow <span class='add'>for</span> lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_4">4&#160;</span> Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour will walk with slanders.
<span class="verse" id="JR9_5">5&#160;</span> And they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, <span class='add'>and</span> weary themselves to commit iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="JR9_6">6&#160;</span> Thine habitation <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how shall I do for the daughter of my people? 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_8">8&#160;</span> Their tongue <span class='add'>is as</span> an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: <span class='add'>one</span> speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Shall I not visit them for these <span class='add'>things</span>? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_10">10&#160;</span> For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can pass through <span class='add'>them;</span> neither can <span class='add'>men</span> hear the voice of the cattle; both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled; they are gone.
<span class="verse" id="JR9_11">11&#160;</span> And I will make Jerusalem heaps, <span class='add'>and</span> a den of dragons; and I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Who <span class='add'>is</span> the wise man, that may understand this? and <span class='add'>who is he</span> to whom the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perisheth <span class='add'>and</span> is burned up like a wilderness, that none passeth through? 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith, Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein; 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_14">14&#160;</span> But have walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim, which their fathers taught them:
<span class="verse" id="JR9_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will feed them, <span class='add'>even</span> this people, with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_16">16&#160;</span> I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for cunning <span class='add'>women</span>, that they may come: 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_18">18&#160;</span> And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_19">19&#160;</span> For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our dwellings have cast <span class='add'>us</span> out. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_20">20&#160;</span> Yet hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbour lamentation. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_21">21&#160;</span> For death is come up into our windows, <span class='add'>and</span> is entered into our palaces, to cut off the children from without, <span class='add'>and</span> the young men from the streets. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_22">22&#160;</span> Speak, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Even the carcases of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, and none shall gather <span class='add'>them</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Let not the wise <span class='add'>man</span> glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty <span class='add'>man</span> glory in his might, let not the rich <span class='add'>man</span> glory in his riches: 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_24">24&#160;</span> But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these <span class='add'>things</span> I delight, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will punish all <span class='add'>them which are</span> circumcised with the uncircumcised;
<span class="verse" id="JR9_26">26&#160;</span> Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all <span class='add'>that are</span> in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all <span class='add'>these</span> nations <span class='add'>are</span> uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel <span class='add'>are</span> uncircumcised in the heart.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_1">1&#160;</span> Hear ye the word which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> speaketh unto you, O house of Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_3">3&#160;</span> For the customs of the people <span class='add'>are</span> vain: for <span class='add'>one</span> cutteth a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_4">4&#160;</span> They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it move not. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_5">5&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> upright as the palm tree, but speak not: they must needs be borne, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for they cannot do evil, neither also <span class='add'>is it</span> in them to do good. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_6">6&#160;</span>Forasmuch as <span class='add'>there is</span> none like unto thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; thou <span class='add'>art</span> great, and thy name <span class='add'>is</span> great in might. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_7">7&#160;</span> Who would not fear thee, O King of nations? for to thee doth it appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise <span class='add'>men</span> of the nations, and in all their kingdoms, <span class='add'>there is</span> none like unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_8">8&#160;</span> But they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock <span class='add'>is</span> a doctrine of vanities.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_9">9&#160;</span> Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue and purple <span class='add'>is</span> their clothing: they <span class='add'>are</span> all the work of cunning <span class='add'>men</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_10">10&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the true God, he <span class='add'>is</span> the living God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_11">11&#160;</span> Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, <span class='add'>even</span> they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_12">12&#160;</span> He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his discretion. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_13">13&#160;</span> When he uttereth his voice, <span class='add'>there is</span> a multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_14">14&#160;</span> Every man is brutish in <span class='add'>his</span> knowledge: every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image <span class='add'>is</span> falsehood, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no breath in them.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_15">15&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> vanity, <span class='add'>and</span> the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_16">16&#160;</span> The portion of Jacob <span class='add'>is</span> not like them: for he <span class='add'>is</span> the former of all <span class='add'>things;</span> and Israel <span class='add'>is</span> the rod of his inheritance: The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabitant of the fortress.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_18">18&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and will distress them, that they may find <span class='add'>it so</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous: but I said, Truly this <span class='add'>is</span> a grief, and I must bear it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_20">20&#160;</span> My tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken: my children are gone forth of me, and they <span class='add'>are</span> not: <span class='add'>there is</span> none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_21">21&#160;</span> For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_22">22&#160;</span> Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, <span class='add'>and</span> a den of dragons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_23">23&#160;</span>¶ O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I know that the way of man <span class='add'>is</span> not in himself: <span class='add'>it is</span> not in man that walketh to direct his steps. 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_24">24&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.
<span class="verse" id="JR10_25">25&#160;</span> Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_2">2&#160;</span> Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_3">3&#160;</span> And say thou unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel; Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man that obeyeth not the words of this covenant, 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_4">4&#160;</span> Which I commanded your fathers in the day <span class='add'>that</span> I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I command you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God: 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_5">5&#160;</span> That I may perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day. Then answered I, and said, So be it, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_6">6&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_7">7&#160;</span> For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day <span class='add'>that</span> I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, <span class='add'>even</span> unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_8">8&#160;</span> Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart: therefore I will bring upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded <span class='add'>them</span> to do; but they did <span class='add'>them</span> not.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_10">10&#160;</span> They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_12">12&#160;</span> Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not save them at all in the time of their trouble.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_13">13&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>according to</span> the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah; and <span class='add'>according to</span> the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to <span class='add'>that</span> shameful thing, <span class='add'>even</span> altars to burn incense unto Baal.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I will not hear <span class='add'>them</span> in the time that they cry unto me for their trouble.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_15">15&#160;</span> What hath my beloved to do in mine house, <span class='add'>seeing</span> she hath wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_16">16&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called thy name, A green olive tree, fair, <span class='add'>and</span> of goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_17">17&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, that planted thee, hath pronounced evil against thee, for the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done against themselves to provoke me to anger in offering incense unto Baal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given me knowledge <span class='add'>of it</span>, and I know <span class='add'>it:</span> then thou shewedst me their doings. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_19">19&#160;</span>But I <span class='add'>was</span> like a lamb <span class='add'>or</span> an ox <span class='add'>that</span> is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.
<span class="verse" id="JR11_20">20&#160;</span> But, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_21">21&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of the men of Anathoth, that seek thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that thou die not by our hand: 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons and their daughters shall die by famine:
<span class="verse" id="JR11_23">23&#160;</span> And there shall be no remnant of them: for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, <span class='add'>even</span> the year of their visitation.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_1">1&#160;</span> Righteous <span class='add'>art</span> thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk with thee of <span class='add'>thy</span> judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? <span class='add'>wherefore</span> are all they happy that deal very treacherously?
<span class="verse" id="JR12_2">2&#160;</span> Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou <span class='add'>art</span> near in their mouth, and far from their reins.
<span class="verse" id="JR12_3">3&#160;</span> But thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, knowest me: thou hast seen me, and tried mine heart toward thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.
<span class="verse" id="JR12_4">4&#160;</span> How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He shall not see our last end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_5">5&#160;</span>¶ If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how canst thou contend with horses? and <span class='add'>if</span> in the land of peace, <span class='add'>wherein</span> thou trustedst, <span class='add'>they wearied thee</span>, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan? 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_6">6&#160;</span> For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee; yea, they have called a multitude after thee: believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_7">7&#160;</span>¶ I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.
<span class="verse" id="JR12_8">8&#160;</span> Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out against me: therefore have I hated it.
<span class="verse" id="JR12_9">9&#160;</span> Mine heritage <span class='add'>is</span> unto me <span class='add'>as</span> a speckled bird, the birds round about <span class='add'>are</span> against her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field, come to devour.
<span class="verse" id="JR12_10">10&#160;</span> Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="JR12_11">11&#160;</span> They have made it desolate, <span class='add'>and being</span> desolate it mourneth unto me; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth <span class='add'>it</span> to heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_12">12&#160;</span> The spoilers are come upon all high places through the wilderness: for the sword of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall devour from the <span class='add'>one</span> end of the land even to the <span class='add'>other</span> end of the land: no flesh shall have peace. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_13">13&#160;</span> They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: they have put themselves to pain, <span class='add'>but</span> shall not profit: and they shall be ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against all mine evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house of Judah from among them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_15">15&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out I will return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_16">16&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built in the midst of my people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_17">17&#160;</span> But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, Go and get thee a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_2">2&#160;</span> So I got a girdle according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and put <span class='add'>it</span> on my loins. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_3">3&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me the second time, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_4">4&#160;</span> Take the girdle that thou hast got, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_5">5&#160;</span> So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_6">6&#160;</span> And it came to pass after many days, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, which I commanded thee to hide there. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_7">7&#160;</span> Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from the place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_8">8&#160;</span> Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_9">9&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_10">10&#160;</span> This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them, and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle, which is good for nothing.
<span class="verse" id="JR13_11">11&#160;</span> For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not hear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they shall say unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine? 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_13">13&#160;</span> Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon David’s throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_14">14&#160;</span> And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_16">16&#160;</span> Give glory to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, <span class='add'>and</span> make <span class='add'>it</span> gross darkness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_17">17&#160;</span> But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for <span class='add'>your</span> pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> flock is carried away captive. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_18">18&#160;</span> Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down: for your principalities shall come down, <span class='add'>even</span> the crown of your glory.
<span class="verse" id="JR13_19">19&#160;</span> The cities of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open <span class='add'>them:</span> Judah shall be carried away captive all of it, it shall be wholly carried away captive. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_20">20&#160;</span> Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north: where <span class='add'>is</span> the flock <span class='add'>that</span> was given thee, thy beautiful flock? 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_21">21&#160;</span> What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast taught them <span class='add'>to be</span> captains, <span class='add'>and</span> as chief over thee: shall not sorrows take thee, as a woman in travail?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, <span class='add'>and</span> thy heels made bare.
<span class="verse" id="JR13_23">23&#160;</span> Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? <span class='add'>then</span> may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
<span class="verse" id="JR13_24">24&#160;</span> Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away by the wind of the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_25">25&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_26">26&#160;</span> Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may appear. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_27">27&#160;</span> I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, <span class='add'>and</span> thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when <span class='add'>shall it</span> once <span class='add'>be</span>?</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth.
<span class="verse" id="JR14_2">2&#160;</span> Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_3">3&#160;</span> And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they came to the pits, <span class='add'>and</span> found no water; they returned with their vessels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_4">4&#160;</span> Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_5">5&#160;</span> Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsook <span class='add'>it</span>, because there was no grass. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_6">6&#160;</span> And the wild asses did stand in the high places, they snuffed up the wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because <span class='add'>there was</span> no grass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_7">7&#160;</span>¶ O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou <span class='add'>it</span> for thy name’s sake: for our backslidings are many; we have sinned against thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_8">8&#160;</span> O the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man <span class='add'>that</span> turneth aside to tarry for a night? 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_9">9&#160;</span> Why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, as a mighty man <span class='add'>that</span> cannot save? yet thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>art</span> in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto this people, Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> doth not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_11">11&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, Pray not for this people for <span class='add'>their</span> good. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_12">12&#160;</span> When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt offering and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then said I, Ah, Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.
<span class="verse" id="JR14_14">14&#160;</span> Then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land; By sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_16">16&#160;</span> And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thou shalt say this word unto them; Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_18">18&#160;</span> If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with famine! yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a land that they know not.
<span class="verse" id="JR14_19">19&#160;</span> Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? why hast thou smitten us, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no healing for us? we looked for peace, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no good; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble! 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_20">20&#160;</span> We acknowledge, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, our wickedness, <span class='add'>and</span> the iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_21">21&#160;</span> Do not abhor <span class='add'>us</span>, for thy name’s sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_22">22&#160;</span> Are there <span class='add'>any</span> among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? <span class='add'>art</span> not thou he, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these <span class='add'>things</span>.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_1">1&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, <span class='add'>yet</span> my mind <span class='add'>could</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> toward this people: cast <span class='add'>them</span> out of my sight, and let them go forth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_2">2&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, Whither shall we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Such as <span class='add'>are</span> for death, to death; and such as <span class='add'>are</span> for the sword, to the sword; and such as <span class='add'>are</span> for the famine, to the famine; and such as <span class='add'>are</span> for the captivity, to the captivity. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_3">3&#160;</span> And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy.
<span class="verse" id="JR15_4">4&#160;</span> And I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for <span class='add'>that</span> which he did in Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="JR15_5">5&#160;</span> For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?
<span class="verse" id="JR15_6">6&#160;</span> Thou hast forsaken me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_7">7&#160;</span> And I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I will bereave <span class='add'>them</span> of children, I will destroy my people, <span class='add'>since</span> they return not from their ways.
<span class="verse" id="JR15_8">8&#160;</span> Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas: I have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler at noonday: I have caused <span class='add'>him</span> to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors upon the city.
<span class="verse" id="JR15_9">9&#160;</span> She that hath borne seven languisheth: she hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone down while <span class='add'>it was</span> yet day: she hath been ashamed and confounded: and the residue of them will I deliver to the sword before their enemies, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; <span class='add'>yet</span> every one of them doth curse me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_11">11&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Verily it shall be well with thy remnant; verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee <span class='add'>well</span> in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.
<span class="verse" id="JR15_12">12&#160;</span> Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel? 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_13">13&#160;</span> Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without price, and <span class='add'>that</span> for all thy sins, even in all thy borders. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_14">14&#160;</span>And I will make <span class='add'>thee</span> to pass with thine enemies into a land <span class='add'>which</span> thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, <span class='add'>which</span> shall burn upon you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_15">15&#160;</span>¶ O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_16">16&#160;</span> Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="JR15_17">17&#160;</span> I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_18">18&#160;</span> Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, <span class='add'>which</span> refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, <span class='add'>and as</span> waters <span class='add'>that</span> fail?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, If thou return, then will I bring thee again, <span class='add'>and</span> thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_20">20&#160;</span> And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall: and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_21">21&#160;</span> And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came also unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_2">2&#160;</span> Thou shalt not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_3">3&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this land; 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_4">4&#160;</span> They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be lamented; neither shall they be buried; <span class='add'>but</span> they shall be as dung upon the face of the earth: and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine; and their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_5">5&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> lovingkindness and mercies.
<span class="verse" id="JR16_6">6&#160;</span> Both the great and the small shall die in this land: they shall not be buried, neither shall <span class='add'>men</span> lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them: 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_7">7&#160;</span>Neither shall <span class='add'>men</span> tear <span class='add'>themselves</span> for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall <span class='add'>men</span> give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.
<span class="verse" id="JR16_8">8&#160;</span> Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with them to eat and to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_9">9&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> pronounced all this great evil against us? or what <span class='add'>is</span> our iniquity? or what <span class='add'>is</span> our sin that we have committed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God? 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_11">11&#160;</span> Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law; 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_12">12&#160;</span> And ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil heart, that they may not hearken unto me:
<span class="verse" id="JR16_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore will I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know not, <span class='add'>neither</span> ye nor your fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where I will not shew you favour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that it shall no more be said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_15">15&#160;</span> But, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and they shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the holes of the rocks. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_17">17&#160;</span> For mine eyes <span class='add'>are</span> upon all their ways: they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_18">18&#160;</span> And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double; because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_19">19&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and <span class='add'>things</span> wherein <span class='add'>there is</span> no profit. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_20">20&#160;</span> Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they <span class='add'>are</span> no gods? 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_21">21&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name <span class='add'>is</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_1">1&#160;</span> The sin of Judah <span class='add'>is</span> written with a pen of iron, <span class='add'>and</span> with the point of a diamond: <span class='add'>it is</span> graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars;
<span class="verse" id="JR17_2">2&#160;</span> Whilst their children remember their altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_3">3&#160;</span> O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance <span class='add'>and</span> all thy treasures to the spoil, <span class='add'>and</span> thy high places for sin, throughout all thy borders. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_4">4&#160;</span> And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, <span class='add'>which</span> shall burn for ever.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_6">6&#160;</span> For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, <span class='add'>in</span> a salt land and not inhabited. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_7">7&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> the man that trusteth in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and whose hope the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_8">8&#160;</span> For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and <span class='add'>that</span> spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_9">9&#160;</span>¶ The heart <span class='add'>is</span> deceitful above all <span class='add'>things</span>, and desperately wicked: who can know it? 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_10">10&#160;</span> I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> search the heart, <span class='add'>I</span> try the reins, even to give every man according to his ways, <span class='add'>and</span> according to the fruit of his doings. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the partridge sitteth <span class='add'>on eggs</span>, and hatcheth <span class='add'>them</span> not; <span class='add'>so</span> he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_12">12&#160;</span>¶ A glorious high throne from the beginning <span class='add'>is</span> the place of our sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_13">13&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, <span class='add'>and</span> they that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the fountain of living waters. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_14">14&#160;</span> Heal me, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for thou <span class='add'>art</span> my praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Behold, they say unto me, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? let it come now. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_16">16&#160;</span> As for me, I have not hastened from <span class='add'>being</span> a pastor to follow thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was <span class='add'>right</span> before thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR17_17">17&#160;</span> Be not a terror unto me: thou <span class='add'>art</span> my hope in the day of evil. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_18">18&#160;</span> Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Thus said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_20">20&#160;</span> And say unto them, Hear ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates: 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_21">21&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring <span class='add'>it</span> in by the gates of Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_22">22&#160;</span> Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_23">23&#160;</span> But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_24">24&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein; 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_25">25&#160;</span> Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_26">26&#160;</span> And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_27">27&#160;</span> But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_1">1&#160;</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_2">2&#160;</span> Arise, and go down to the potter’s house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_3">3&#160;</span> Then I went down to the potter’s house, and, behold, he wrought a work on the wheels.
<span class="verse" id="JR18_4">4&#160;</span> And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR18_5">5&#160;</span> Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_6">6&#160;</span> O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Behold, as the clay <span class='add'>is</span> in the potter’s hand, so <span class='add'>are</span> ye in mine hand, O house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>At what</span> instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy <span class='add'>it;</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_8">8&#160;</span> If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_9">9&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>at what</span> instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant <span class='add'>it;</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_10">10&#160;</span> If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I would benefit them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_12">12&#160;</span> And they said, There is no hope: but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Ask ye now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_14">14&#160;</span>Will <span class='add'>a man</span> leave the snow of Lebanon <span class='add'>which cometh</span> from the rock of the field? <span class='add'>or</span> shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?
<span class="verse" id="JR18_15">15&#160;</span> Because my people hath forgotten me, they have burned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways <span class='add'>from</span> the ancient paths, to walk in paths, <span class='add'>in</span> a way not cast up; 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_16">16&#160;</span> To make their land desolate, <span class='add'>and</span> a perpetual hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_17">17&#160;</span> I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I will shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.
<span class="verse" id="JR18_19">19&#160;</span> Give heed to me, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_20">20&#160;</span> Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, <span class='add'>and</span> to turn away thy wrath from them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_21">21&#160;</span> Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out their <span class='add'>blood</span> by the force of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and <span class='add'>be</span> widows; and let their men be put to death; <span class='add'>let</span> their young men <span class='add'>be</span> slain by the sword in battle.
<span class="verse" id="JR18_22">22&#160;</span> Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them: for they have digged a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_23">23&#160;</span> Yet, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay <span class='add'>me:</span> forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee; deal <span class='add'>thus</span> with them in the time of thine anger.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR19_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Go and get a potter’s earthen bottle, and <span class='add'>take</span> of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests; 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_2">2&#160;</span> And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee,
<span class="verse" id="JR19_3">3&#160;</span> And say, Hear ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_4">4&#160;</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this place with the blood of innocents; 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_5">5&#160;</span> They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire <span class='add'>for</span> burnt offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake <span class='add'>it</span>, neither came <span class='add'>it</span> into my mind: 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that this place shall no more be called Tophet, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of slaughter. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_7">7&#160;</span> And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives: and their carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_8">8&#160;</span> And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_9">9&#160;</span> And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and they that seek their lives, shall straiten them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR19_10">10&#160;</span> Then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that go with thee, 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_11">11&#160;</span> And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as <span class='add'>one</span> breaketh a potter’s vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall bury <span class='add'>them</span> in Tophet, till <span class='add'>there be</span> no place to bury.
<span class="verse" id="JR19_12">12&#160;</span> Thus will I do unto this place, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to the inhabitants thereof, and <span class='add'>even</span> make this city as Tophet: 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_13">13&#160;</span> And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, shall be defiled as the place of Tophet, because of all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of heaven, and have poured out drink offerings unto other gods. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_14">14&#160;</span> Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house; and said to all the people, 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_15">15&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_1">1&#160;</span> Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who <span class='add'>was</span> also chief governor in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_2">2&#160;</span> Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that <span class='add'>were</span> in the high gate of Benjamin, which <span class='add'>was</span> by the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_3">3&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor-missabib.
<span class="verse" id="JR20_4">4&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold <span class='add'>it:</span> and I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_5">5&#160;</span> Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city, and all the labours thereof, and all the precious things thereof, and all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_6">6&#160;</span> And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thine house shall go into captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_7">7&#160;</span>¶ O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived: thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me.
<span class="verse" id="JR20_8">8&#160;</span> For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_9">9&#160;</span> Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But <span class='add'>his word</span> was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not <span class='add'>stay</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_10">10&#160;</span>¶ For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, <span class='add'>say they</span>, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my halting, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.
<span class="verse" id="JR20_11">11&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper: <span class='add'>their</span> everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_12">12&#160;</span> But, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, that triest the righteous, <span class='add'>and</span> seest the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee have I opened my cause. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_13">13&#160;</span> Sing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, praise ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he hath delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the day wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_15">15&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thee; making him very glad. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_16">16&#160;</span> And let that man be as the cities which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at noontide; 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_17">17&#160;</span> Because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb <span class='add'>to be</span> always great <span class='add'>with me</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_18">18&#160;</span> Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_1">1&#160;</span> The word which came unto Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_2">2&#160;</span> Enquire, I pray thee, of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for us; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah: 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_4">4&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel; Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that <span class='add'>are</span> in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and <span class='add'>against</span> the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this city. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_5">5&#160;</span> And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_6">6&#160;</span> And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast: they shall die of a great pestilence. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_7">7&#160;</span> And afterward, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of death. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_9">9&#160;</span> He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be unto him for a prey. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_10">10&#160;</span> For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for good, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And touching the house of the king of Judah, <span class='add'>say</span>, Hear ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_12">12&#160;</span> O house of David, thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver <span class='add'>him that is</span> spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench <span class='add'>it</span>, because of the evil of your doings.
<span class="verse" id="JR21_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, <span class='add'>and</span> rock of the plain, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; which say, Who shall come down against us? or who shall enter into our habitations?
<span class="verse" id="JR21_14">14&#160;</span> But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things round about it.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word, 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_2">2&#160;</span> And say, Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates: 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_4">4&#160;</span> For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.
<span class="verse" id="JR22_5">5&#160;</span> But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that this house shall become a desolation. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_6">6&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the king’s house of Judah; Thou <span class='add'>art</span> Gilead unto me, <span class='add'>and</span> the head of Lebanon: <span class='add'>yet</span> surely I will make thee a wilderness, <span class='add'>and</span> cities <span class='add'>which</span> are not inhabited. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_7">7&#160;</span> And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast <span class='add'>them</span> into the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_8">8&#160;</span> And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> done thus unto this great city? 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_9">9&#160;</span> Then they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: <span class='add'>but</span> weep sore for him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native country. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_11">11&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> touching Shallum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth out of this place; He shall not return thither any more: 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_12">12&#160;</span> But he shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall see this land no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; <span class='add'>that</span> useth his neighbour’s service without wages, and giveth him not for his work; 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_14">14&#160;</span> That saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and <span class='add'>it is</span> cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.
<span class="verse" id="JR22_15">15&#160;</span> Shalt thou reign, because thou closest <span class='add'>thyself</span> in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, <span class='add'>and</span> then <span class='add'>it was</span> well with him? 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_16">16&#160;</span> He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then <span class='add'>it was</span> well <span class='add'>with him: was</span> not this to know me? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_17">17&#160;</span> But thine eyes and thine heart <span class='add'>are</span> not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR22_18">18&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory! 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_19">19&#160;</span> He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the passages: for all thy lovers are destroyed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_21">21&#160;</span> I spake unto thee in thy prosperity; <span class='add'>but</span> thou saidst, I will not hear. This <span class='add'>hath been</span> thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not my voice.
<span class="verse" id="JR22_22">22&#160;</span> The wind shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go into captivity: surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_23">23&#160;</span> O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!
<span class="verse" id="JR22_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence; 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_25">25&#160;</span> And I will give thee into the hand of them that seek thy life, and into the hand <span class='add'>of them</span> whose face thou fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_26">26&#160;</span> And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into another country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_27">27&#160;</span> But to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall they not return.
<span class="verse" id="JR22_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> this man Coniah a despised broken idol? <span class='add'>is he</span> a vessel wherein <span class='add'>is</span> no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into a land which they know not? 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_29">29&#160;</span> O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_30">30&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Write ye this man childless, a man <span class='add'>that</span> shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_1">1&#160;</span> Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_2">2&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel against the pastors that feed my people; Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_3">3&#160;</span> And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and increase. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_4">4&#160;</span> And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_6">6&#160;</span> In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this <span class='add'>is</span> his name whereby he shall be called, THE <span class='nd'>LORD</span> OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that they shall no more say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_8">8&#160;</span> But, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and because of the words of his holiness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_10">10&#160;</span> For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force <span class='add'>is</span> not right.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_11">11&#160;</span> For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_12">12&#160;</span> Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery <span class='add'>ways</span> in the darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall therein: for I will bring evil upon them, <span class='add'>even</span> the year of their visitation, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_13">13&#160;</span> And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_14">14&#160;</span> I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness: they are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts concerning the prophets; Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_16">16&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, <span class='add'>and</span> not out of the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_17">17&#160;</span> They say still unto them that despise me, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said, Ye shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_18">18&#160;</span> For who hath stood in the counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and hath perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard <span class='add'>it</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JR23_19">19&#160;</span> Behold, a whirlwind of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the wicked. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_20">20&#160;</span> The anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall not return, until he have executed, and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_21">21&#160;</span> I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_22">22&#160;</span> But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Am</span> I a God at hand, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and not a God afar off? 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_24">24&#160;</span> Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_25">25&#160;</span> I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_26">26&#160;</span>How long shall <span class='add'>this</span> be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies? yea, <span class='add'>they are</span> prophets of the deceit of their own heart; 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_27">27&#160;</span> Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_28">28&#160;</span> The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What <span class='add'>is</span> the chaff to the wheat? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not my word like as a fire? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and like a hammer <span class='add'>that</span> breaketh the rock in pieces? 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore, behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against the prophets, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that steal my words every one from his neighbour. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_31">31&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against the prophets, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that use their tongues, and say, He saith.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_32">32&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at all, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What <span class='add'>is</span> the burden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? thou shalt then say unto them, What burden? I will even forsake you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_34">34&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that shall say, The burden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will even punish that man and his house.
<span class="verse" id="JR23_35">35&#160;</span> Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother, What hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered? and, What hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spoken? 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_36">36&#160;</span> And the burden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall ye mention no more: for every man’s word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_37">37&#160;</span> Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> answered thee? and, What hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spoken? 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_38">38&#160;</span> But since ye say, The burden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Because ye say this word, The burden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shall not say, The burden of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_39">39&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, I, even I, will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the city that I gave you and your fathers, <span class='add'>and cast you</span> out of my presence: 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_40">40&#160;</span> And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_1">1&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs <span class='add'>were</span> set before the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, after that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_2">2&#160;</span> One basket <span class='add'>had</span> very good figs, <span class='add'>even</span> like the figs <span class='add'>that are</span> first ripe: and the other basket <span class='add'>had</span> very naughty figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad.
<span class="verse" id="JR24_3">3&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_5">5&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel; Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for <span class='add'>their</span> good.
<span class="verse" id="JR24_6">6&#160;</span> For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull <span class='add'>them</span> down; and I will plant them, and not pluck <span class='add'>them</span> up. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_7">7&#160;</span> And I will give them an heart to know me, that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall return unto me with their whole heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil; surely thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt: 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_9">9&#160;</span> And I will deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for <span class='add'>their</span> hurt, <span class='add'>to be</span> a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.
<span class="verse" id="JR24_10">10&#160;</span> And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that <span class='add'>was</span> the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_2">2&#160;</span> The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_3">3&#160;</span> From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that <span class='add'>is</span> the three and twentieth year, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets, rising early and sending <span class='add'>them;</span> but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_5">5&#160;</span> They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever: 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_6">6&#160;</span> And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands; and I will do you no hurt. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_7">7&#160;</span> Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Because ye have not heard my words, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolations. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_10">10&#160;</span> Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.
<span class="verse" id="JR25_11">11&#160;</span> And this whole land shall be a desolation, <span class='add'>and</span> an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, <span class='add'>that</span> I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make it perpetual desolations.
<span class="verse" id="JR25_13">13&#160;</span> And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, <span class='add'>even</span> all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_14">14&#160;</span> For many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the works of their own hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_15">15&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel unto me; Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_16">16&#160;</span> And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_17">17&#160;</span> Then took I the cup at the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> hand, and made all the nations to drink, unto whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had sent me: 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>To wit</span>, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse; as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_19">19&#160;</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and all his people; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_20">20&#160;</span> And all the mingled people, and all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_21">21&#160;</span> Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_22">22&#160;</span> And all the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which <span class='add'>are</span> beyond the sea,
<span class="verse" id="JR25_23">23&#160;</span> Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all <span class='add'>that are</span> in the utmost corners,
<span class="verse" id="JR25_24">24&#160;</span> And all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_25">25&#160;</span> And all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_26">26&#160;</span> And all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which <span class='add'>are</span> upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_27">27&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_28">28&#160;</span> And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Ye shall certainly drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_29">29&#160;</span> For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say unto them, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he shall give a shout, as they that tread <span class='add'>the grapes</span>, against all the inhabitants of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_31">31&#160;</span> A noise shall come <span class='add'>even</span> to the ends of the earth; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he will give them <span class='add'>that are</span> wicked to the sword, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_32">32&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_33">33&#160;</span> And the slain of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be at that day from <span class='add'>one</span> end of the earth even unto the <span class='add'>other</span> end of the earth: they shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the ground. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_34">34&#160;</span>¶ Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves <span class='add'>in the ashes</span>, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel.
<span class="verse" id="JR25_35">35&#160;</span> And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.
<span class="verse" id="JR25_36">36&#160;</span> A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, <span class='add'>shall be heard:</span> for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoiled their pasture. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_37">37&#160;</span> And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_38">38&#160;</span> He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of his fierce anger.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_1">1&#160;</span> In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Stand in the court of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, all the words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word: 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_3">3&#160;</span> If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_4">4&#160;</span> And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you, 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_5">5&#160;</span> To hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending <span class='add'>them</span>, but ye have not hearkened; 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_6">6&#160;</span> Then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_7">7&#160;</span> So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded <span class='add'>him</span> to speak unto all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_9">9&#160;</span> Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_10">10&#160;</span>¶ When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from the king’s house unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> <span class='add'>house</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR26_11">11&#160;</span> Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to all the people, saying, This man <span class='add'>is</span> worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_14">14&#160;</span>As for me, behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> in your hand: do with me as seemeth good and meet unto you.
<span class="verse" id="JR26_15">15&#160;</span> But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to the prophets; This man <span class='add'>is</span> not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_17">17&#160;</span> Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all the assembly of the people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_18">18&#160;</span> Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Zion shall be plowed <span class='add'>like</span> a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_19">19&#160;</span> Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and besought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_20">20&#160;</span> And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjath-jearim, who prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah: 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_21">21&#160;</span> And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt; 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_22">22&#160;</span> And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, <span class='add'>namely</span>, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and <span class='add'>certain</span> men with him into Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_23">23&#160;</span> And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.
<span class="verse" id="JR26_24">24&#160;</span> Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_1">1&#160;</span> In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to me; Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck,<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_3">3&#160;</span> And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah; 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_4">4&#160;</span> And command them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say unto your masters;
<span class="verse" id="JR27_5">5&#160;</span> I have made the earth, the man and the beast that <span class='add'>are</span> upon the ground, by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_6">6&#160;</span> And now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_7">7&#160;</span> And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son’s son, until the very time of his land come: and then many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_8">8&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> the nation and kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation will I punish, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon:
<span class="verse" id="JR27_10">10&#160;</span> For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_11">11&#160;</span> But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they shall till it, and dwell therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_12">12&#160;</span>¶ I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_13">13&#160;</span> Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken against the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon? 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_15">15&#160;</span> For I have not sent them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, yet they prophesy a lie in my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.
<span class="verse" id="JR27_16">16&#160;</span> Also I spake to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_17">17&#160;</span> Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste? 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_18">18&#160;</span>But if they <span class='add'>be</span> prophets, and if the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be with them, let them now make intercession to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>in</span> the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_19">19&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that remain in this city, 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_20">20&#160;</span> Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_21">21&#160;</span> Yea, thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the vessels that remain <span class='add'>in</span> the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>in</span> the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_22">22&#160;</span> They shall be carried to Babylon, and there shall they be until the day that I visit them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; then will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, <span class='add'>and</span> in the fifth month, <span class='add'>that</span> Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which <span class='add'>was</span> of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_2">2&#160;</span> Thus speaketh the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_3">3&#160;</span> Within two full years will I bring again into this place all the vessels of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried them to Babylon:
<span class="verse" id="JR28_4">4&#160;</span> And I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that stood in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_6">6&#160;</span> Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do so: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to bring again the vessels of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, and all that is carried away captive, from Babylon into this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_7">7&#160;</span> Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people; 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_8">8&#160;</span> The prophets that have been before me and before thee of old prophesied both against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_9">9&#160;</span> The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, <span class='add'> then</span> shall the prophet be known, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath truly sent him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, and brake it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_11">11&#160;</span> And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jeremiah <span class='add'>the prophet</span>, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_13">13&#160;</span> Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_14">14&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not sent thee; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR28_17">17&#160;</span> So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR29_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders which were carried away captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_2">2&#160;</span>(After that Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;)
<span class="verse" id="JR29_3">3&#160;</span> By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon) saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_4">4&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all that are carried away captives, whom I have caused to be carried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_5">5&#160;</span> Build ye houses, and dwell <span class='add'>in them;</span> and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_6">6&#160;</span> Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye may be increased there, and not diminished. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_7">7&#160;</span> And seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for it: for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_8">8&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your prophets and your diviners, that <span class='add'>be</span> in the midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_9">9&#160;</span> For they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_10">10&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, That after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_11">11&#160;</span> For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.
<span class="verse" id="JR29_12">12&#160;</span> Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_13">13&#160;</span> And ye shall seek me, and find <span class='add'>me</span>, when ye shall search for me with all your heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_14">14&#160;</span> And I will be found of you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and I will turn away your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have driven you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and I will bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away captive. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Because ye have said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath raised us up prophets in Babylon; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Know</span> that thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of the king that sitteth upon the throne of David, and of all the people that dwelleth in this city, <span class='add'>and</span> of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_17">17&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_18">18&#160;</span> And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven them:
<span class="verse" id="JR29_19">19&#160;</span> Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending <span class='add'>them;</span> but ye would not hear, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Hear ye therefore the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon: 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_21">21&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto you in my name; Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_22">22&#160;</span> And of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of Judah which <span class='add'>are</span> in Babylon, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire; 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_23">23&#160;</span> Because they have committed villany in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbours’ wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I have not commanded them; even I know, and <span class='add'>am</span> a witness, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_24">24&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Thus</span> shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JR29_25">25&#160;</span> Thus speaketh the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, and to all the priests, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_26">26&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for every man <span class='add'>that is</span> mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_27">27&#160;</span> Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a prophet to you? 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_28">28&#160;</span> For therefore he sent unto us <span class='add'>in</span> Babylon, saying, This <span class='add'>captivity is</span> long: build ye houses, and dwell <span class='add'>in them;</span> and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_29">29&#160;</span> And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_31">31&#160;</span> Send to all them of the captivity, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he caused you to trust in a lie: 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_32">32&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this people; neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my people, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; because he hath taught rebellion against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR30_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_2">2&#160;</span> Thus speaketh the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_3">3&#160;</span> For, lo, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the words that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_5">5&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.
<span class="verse" id="JR30_6">6&#160;</span> Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?
<span class="verse" id="JR30_7">7&#160;</span> Alas! for that day <span class='add'>is</span> great, so that none <span class='add'>is</span> like it: it <span class='add'>is</span> even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved out of it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_8">8&#160;</span> For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, <span class='add'>that</span> I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him: 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_9">9&#160;</span> But they shall serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make <span class='add'>him</span> afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_11">11&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to save thee: though I make a full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_12">12&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Thy bruise <span class='add'>is</span> incurable, <span class='add'>and</span> thy wound <span class='add'>is</span> grievous. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines.
<span class="verse" id="JR30_14">14&#160;</span> All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; <span class='add'>because</span> thy sins were increased. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_15">15&#160;</span> Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow <span class='add'>is</span> incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity: <span class='add'>because</span> thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_17">17&#160;</span> For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; because they called thee an Outcast, <span class='add'>saying</span>, This <span class='add'>is</span> Zion, whom no man seeketh after. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will bring again the captivity of Jacob’s tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after the manner thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JR30_19">19&#160;</span> And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply them, and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_20">20&#160;</span> Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_21">21&#160;</span> And their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who <span class='add'>is</span> this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_22">22&#160;</span> And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_23">23&#160;</span> Behold, the whirlwind of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> goeth forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="JR30_24">24&#160;</span> The fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall not return, until he have done <span class='add'>it</span>, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR31_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_1">1&#160;</span> At the same time, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, will I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, The people <span class='add'>which were</span> left of the sword found grace in the wilderness; <span class='add'>even</span> Israel, when I went to cause him to rest. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath appeared of old unto me, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I drawn thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR31_4">4&#160;</span> Again I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.
<span class="verse" id="JR31_5">5&#160;</span> Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the planters shall plant, and shall eat <span class='add'>them</span> as common things.
<span class="verse" id="JR31_6">6&#160;</span> For there shall be a day, <span class='add'>that</span> the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_7">7&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, save thy people, the remnant of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, <span class='add'>and</span> with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_9">9&#160;</span> They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim <span class='add'>is</span> my firstborn.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O ye nations, and declare <span class='add'>it</span> in the isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd <span class='add'>doth</span> his flock. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_11">11&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of <span class='add'>him that was</span> stronger than he. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at all. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_13">13&#160;</span> Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_14">14&#160;</span> And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, <span class='add'>and</span> bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they <span class='add'>were</span> not. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_16">16&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they shall come again from the land of the enemy. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_17">17&#160;</span> And there is hope in thine end, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that thy children shall come again to their own border. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_18">18&#160;</span>¶ I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself <span class='add'>thus;</span> Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed <span class='add'>to the yoke:</span> turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_19">19&#160;</span> Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon <span class='add'>my</span> thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> Ephraim my dear son? <span class='add'>is he</span> a pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR31_21">21&#160;</span> Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart toward the highway, <span class='add'>even</span> the way <span class='add'>which</span> thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_22">22&#160;</span>¶ How long wilt thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a man. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_23">23&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; As yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I shall bring again their captivity; The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bless thee, O habitation of justice, <span class='add'>and</span> mountain of holiness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_24">24&#160;</span> And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and in all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and they <span class='add'>that</span> go forth with flocks. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_25">25&#160;</span> For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_26">26&#160;</span> Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_28">28&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_29">29&#160;</span> In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children’s teeth are set on edge. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_30">30&#160;</span> But every one shall die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_32">32&#160;</span> Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day <span class='add'>that</span> I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>:
<span class="verse" id="JR31_33">33&#160;</span>But this <span class='add'>shall be</span> the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_34">34&#160;</span> And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_35">35&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which giveth the sun for a light by day, <span class='add'>and</span> the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name: 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_36">36&#160;</span> If those ordinances depart from before me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>then</span> the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_37">37&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_38">38&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that the city shall be built to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the corner. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_39">39&#160;</span> And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_40">40&#160;</span> And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse gate toward the east, <span class='add'>shall be</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR32_0'>32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which <span class='add'>was</span> the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_2">2&#160;</span> For then the king of Babylon’s army besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which <span class='add'>was</span> in the king of Judah’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_3">3&#160;</span> For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_4">4&#160;</span> And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_5">5&#160;</span> And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shall he be until I visit him, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Jeremiah said, The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come unto thee, saying, Buy thee my field that <span class='add'>is</span> in Anathoth: for the right of redemption <span class='add'>is</span> thine to buy <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_8">8&#160;</span> So Hanameel mine uncle’s son came to me in the court of the prison according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said unto me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that <span class='add'>is</span> in Anathoth, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the country of Benjamin: for the right of inheritance <span class='add'>is</span> thine, and the redemption <span class='add'>is</span> thine; buy <span class='add'>it</span> for thyself. Then I knew that this <span class='add'>was</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_9">9&#160;</span> And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle’s son, that <span class='add'>was</span> in Anathoth, and weighed him the money, <span class='add'>even</span> seventeen shekels of silver.
<span class="verse" id="JR32_10">10&#160;</span> And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed <span class='add'>it</span>, and took witnesses, and weighed <span class='add'>him</span> the money in the balances.
<span class="verse" id="JR32_11">11&#160;</span> So I took the evidence of the purchase, <span class='add'>both</span> that which was sealed <span class='add'>according</span> to the law and custom, and that which was open: 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_12">12&#160;</span> And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle’s <span class='add'>son</span>, and in the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And I charged Baruch before them, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_14">14&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many days. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_15">15&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Houses and fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_17">17&#160;</span> Ah Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched out arm, <span class='add'>and</span> there is nothing too hard for thee:
<span class="verse" id="JR32_18">18&#160;</span> Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: the Great, the Mighty God, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, <span class='add'>is</span> his name, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_19">19&#160;</span> Great in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes <span class='add'>are</span> open upon all the ways of the sons of men: to give every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:
<span class="verse" id="JR32_20">20&#160;</span> Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, <span class='add'>even</span> unto this day, and in Israel, and among <span class='add'>other</span> men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_21">21&#160;</span> And hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with great terror; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_22">22&#160;</span> And hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_23">23&#160;</span> And they came in, and possessed it; but they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast caused all this evil to come upon them: 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_24">24&#160;</span> Behold the mounts, they are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, behold, thou seest <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR32_25">25&#160;</span> And thou hast said unto me, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, Buy thee the field for money, and take witnesses; for the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_27">27&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me? 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it: 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_29">29&#160;</span> And the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come and set fire on this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roofs they have offered incense unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_30">30&#160;</span> For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done evil before me from their youth: for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_31">31&#160;</span> For this city hath been to me <span class='add'>as</span> a provocation of mine anger and of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that I should remove it from before my face,
<span class="verse" id="JR32_32">32&#160;</span> Because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_33">33&#160;</span> And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face: though I taught them, rising up early and teaching <span class='add'>them</span>, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.
<span class="verse" id="JR32_34">34&#160;</span> But they set their abominations in the house, which is called by my name, to defile it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_35">35&#160;</span> And they built the high places of Baal, which <span class='add'>are</span> in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through <span class='add'>the fire</span> unto Molech; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And now therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_37">37&#160;</span> Behold, I will gather them out of all countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely: 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_38">38&#160;</span> And they shall be my people, and I will be their God: 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_39">39&#160;</span> And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them:
<span class="verse" id="JR32_40">40&#160;</span> And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
<span class="verse" id="JR32_41">41&#160;</span> Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.
<span class="verse" id="JR32_42">42&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Like as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I have promised them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_43">43&#160;</span> And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say, <span class='add'>It is</span> desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_44">44&#160;</span> Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal <span class='add'>them</span>, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR33_0'>33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the maker thereof, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that formed it, to establish it; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> his name;<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_3">3&#160;</span> Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not.
<span class="verse" id="JR33_4">4&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword; 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_5">5&#160;</span> They come to fight with the Chaldeans, but <span class='add'>it is</span> to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_6">6&#160;</span> Behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_7">7&#160;</span> And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_8">8&#160;</span> And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_10">10&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Again there shall be heard in this place, which ye say <span class='add'>shall be</span> desolate without man and without beast, <span class='add'>even</span> in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_11">11&#160;</span> The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall say, Praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> good; for his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever: <span class='add'>and</span> of them that shall bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. For I will cause to return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_12">12&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Again in this place, which is desolate without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof, shall be an habitation of shepherds causing <span class='add'>their</span> flocks to lie down. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_13">13&#160;</span> In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that telleth <span class='add'>them</span>, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house of Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_15">15&#160;</span>¶ In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_16">16&#160;</span> In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this <span class='add'>is the name</span> wherewith she shall be called, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our righteousness.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_17">17&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="JR33_18">18&#160;</span> Neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_20">20&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season; 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_22">22&#160;</span> As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured: so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and the Levites that minister unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_23">23&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_24">24&#160;</span> Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation before them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_25">25&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; If my covenant <span class='add'>be</span> not with day and night, <span class='add'>and if</span> I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_26">26&#160;</span> Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob, and David my servant, <span class='add'>so</span> that I will not take <span class='add'>any</span> of his seed <span class='add'>to be</span> rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity to return, and have mercy on them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR34_0'>34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_1">1&#160;</span> The word which came unto Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JR34_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire: 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_3">3&#160;</span> And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="JR34_4">4&#160;</span> Yet hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of thee, Thou shalt not die by the sword: 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> thou shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings which were before thee, so shall they burn <span class='add'>odours</span> for thee; and they will lament thee, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Ah lord! for I have pronounced the word, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_6">6&#160;</span> Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_7">7&#160;</span> When the king of Babylon’s army fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against Azekah: for these defenced cities remained of the cities of Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_8">8&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>This is</span> the word that came unto Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, after that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people which <span class='add'>were</span> at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them; 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_9">9&#160;</span> That every man should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, <span class='add'>being</span> an Hebrew or an Hebrewess, go free; that none should serve himself of them, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, of a Jew his brother. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_10">10&#160;</span> Now when all the princes, and all the people, which had entered into the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and every one his maidservant, go free, that none should serve themselves of them any more, then they obeyed, and let <span class='add'>them</span> go. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_11">11&#160;</span> But afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Therefore the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_13">13&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel; I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_14">14&#160;</span> At the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew, which hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear.
<span class="verse" id="JR34_15">15&#160;</span> And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name:
<span class="verse" id="JR34_16">16&#160;</span> But ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JR34_18">18&#160;</span> And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_19">19&#160;</span> The princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the land, which passed between the parts of the calf; 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_20">20&#160;</span> I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life: and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_21">21&#160;</span> And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon’s army, which are gone up from you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_22">22&#160;</span> Behold, I will command, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR35_0'>35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_1">1&#160;</span> The word which came unto Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_2">2&#160;</span> Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_3">3&#160;</span> Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites; 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_4">4&#160;</span> And I brought them into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which <span class='add'>was</span> by the chamber of the princes, which <span class='add'>was</span> above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door:
<span class="verse" id="JR35_5">5&#160;</span> And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_6">6&#160;</span> But they said, We will drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, <span class='add'>neither ye</span>, nor your sons for ever: 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_7">7&#160;</span> Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have <span class='add'>any:</span> but all your days ye shall dwell in tents; that ye may live many days in the land where ye <span class='add'>be</span> strangers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_8">8&#160;</span> Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our father in all that he hath charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters; 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_9">9&#160;</span> Nor to build houses for us to dwell in: neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed: 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_10">10&#160;</span> But we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_11">11&#160;</span> But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians: so we dwell at Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_13">13&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Go and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_14">14&#160;</span> The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink none, but obey their father’s commandment: notwithstanding I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_15">15&#160;</span> I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending <span class='add'>them</span>, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_16">16&#160;</span> Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father, which he commanded them; but this people hath not hearkened unto me: 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them: because I have spoken unto them, but they have not heard; and I have called unto them, but they have not answered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according unto all that he hath commanded you: 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR36_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, <span class='add'>that</span> this word came unto Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_2">2&#160;</span> Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_3">3&#160;</span> It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_4">4&#160;</span> Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_5">5&#160;</span> And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> shut up; I cannot go into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the ears of the people in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house upon the fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of their cities. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_7">7&#160;</span> It may be they will present their supplication before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and will return every one from his evil way: for great <span class='add'>is</span> the anger and the fury that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath pronounced against this people.
<span class="verse" id="JR36_8">8&#160;</span> And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_9">9&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, <span class='add'>that</span> they proclaimed a fast before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_10">10&#160;</span> Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entry of the new gate of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, in the ears of all the people.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_11">11&#160;</span>¶ When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_12">12&#160;</span> Then he went down into the king’s house, into the scribe’s chamber: and, lo, all the princes sat there, <span class='add'>even</span> Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_13">13&#160;</span> Then Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_15">15&#160;</span> And they said unto him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears. So Baruch read <span class='add'>it</span> in their ears. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_16">16&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they were afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_17">17&#160;</span> And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How didst thou write all these words at his mouth? 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_18">18&#160;</span> Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote <span class='add'>them</span> with ink in the book. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_19">19&#160;</span> Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah; and let no man know where ye be. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words in the ears of the king. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_21">21&#160;</span> So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of Elishama the scribe’s chamber. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_22">22&#160;</span> Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and <span class='add'>there was a fire</span> on the hearth burning before him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_23">23&#160;</span>And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast <span class='add'>it</span> into the fire that <span class='add'>was</span> on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that <span class='add'>was</span> on the hearth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_24">24&#160;</span> Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, <span class='add'>neither</span> the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_25">25&#160;</span> Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would not hear them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_26">26&#160;</span> But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hid them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_28">28&#160;</span> Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burned. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_29">29&#160;</span> And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast thou written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast? 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_31">31&#160;</span> And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire: and there were added besides unto them many like words.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR37_0'>37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_1">1&#160;</span> And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_2">2&#160;</span> But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did hearken unto the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he spake by the prophet Jeremiah.
<span class="verse" id="JR37_3">3&#160;</span> And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God for us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_4">4&#160;</span> Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had not put him into prison. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_5">5&#160;</span> Then Pharaoh’s army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed from Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the prophet Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_7">7&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold, Pharaoh’s army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_8">8&#160;</span> And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_9">9&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.
<span class="verse" id="JR37_10">10&#160;</span> For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained <span class='add'>but</span> wounded men among them, <span class='add'>yet</span> should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh’s army,
<span class="verse" id="JR37_12">12&#160;</span> Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of the people.
<span class="verse" id="JR37_13">13&#160;</span> And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward <span class='add'>was</span> there, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_14">14&#160;</span> Then said Jeremiah, <span class='add'>It is</span> false; I fall not away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.
<span class="verse" id="JR37_15">15&#160;</span> Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made that the prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_16">16&#160;</span>¶ When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;
<span class="verse" id="JR37_17">17&#160;</span> Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took him out: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is there <span class='add'>any</span> word from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_18">18&#160;</span> Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison? 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_19">19&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>are</span> now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land? 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.
<span class="verse" id="JR37_21">21&#160;</span> Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers’ street, until all the bread in the city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR38_0'>38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_1">1&#160;</span> Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, He that remaineth in this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his life for a prey, and shall live. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, This city shall surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon’s army, which shall take it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.
<span class="verse" id="JR38_5">5&#160;</span> Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he <span class='add'>is</span> in your hand: for the king <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>he that</span> can do <span class='add'>any</span> thing against you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_6">6&#160;</span> Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that <span class='add'>was</span> in the court of the prison: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon <span class='add'>there was</span> no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was in the king’s house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon; the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin; 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_8">8&#160;</span> Ebed-melech went forth out of the king’s house, and spake to the king, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_9">9&#160;</span> My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for <span class='add'>there is</span> no more bread in the city.
<span class="verse" id="JR38_10">10&#160;</span> Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he die.
<span class="verse" id="JR38_11">11&#160;</span> So Ebed-melech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and old rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_12">12&#160;</span> And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now <span class='add'>these</span> old cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_13">13&#160;</span> So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the third entry that <span class='add'>is</span> in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.
<span class="verse" id="JR38_15">15&#160;</span> Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare <span class='add'>it</span> unto thee, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt thou not hearken unto me? 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_16">16&#160;</span> So Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, that made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men that seek thy life. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_17">17&#160;</span> Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of Babylon’s princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house: 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_18">18&#160;</span> But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon’s princes, then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_19">19&#160;</span> And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_20">20&#160;</span> But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver <span class='add'>thee</span>. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be well unto thee, and thy soul shall live. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_21">21&#160;</span> But if thou refuse to go forth, this <span class='add'>is</span> the word that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath shewed me: 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_22">22&#160;</span> And, behold, all the women that are left in the king of Judah’s house <span class='add'>shall be</span> brought forth to the king of Babylon’s princes, and those <span class='add'>women</span> shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and have prevailed against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, <span class='add'>and</span> they are turned away back.
<span class="verse" id="JR38_23">23&#160;</span> So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_25">25&#160;</span> But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou hast said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death; also what the king said unto thee: 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_26">26&#160;</span> Then thou shalt say unto them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan’s house, to die there. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_27">27&#160;</span> Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him; for the matter was not perceived.
<span class="verse" id="JR38_28">28&#160;</span> So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that Jerusalem was taken: and he was <span class='add'>there</span> when Jerusalem was taken.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR39_0'>39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_1">1&#160;</span> In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and they besieged it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, the city was broken up. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_3">3&#160;</span> And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, <span class='add'>even</span> Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab-saris, Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king’s garden, by the gate betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_5">5&#160;</span> But the Chaldeans’ army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him.
<span class="verse" id="JR39_6">6&#160;</span> Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_7">7&#160;</span> Moreover he put out Zedekiah’s eyes, and bound him with chains, to carry him to Babylon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the Chaldeans burned the king’s house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_9">9&#160;</span> Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people that remained.
<span class="verse" id="JR39_10">10&#160;</span> But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JR39_12">12&#160;</span> Take him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shall say unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR39_13">13&#160;</span> So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban, Rab-saris, and Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, and all the king of Babylon’s princes;
<span class="verse" id="JR39_14">14&#160;</span> Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the prison, and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Now the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_16">16&#160;</span> Go and speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good; and they shall be <span class='add'>accomplished</span> in that day before thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_17">17&#160;</span> But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou <span class='add'>art</span> afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_18">18&#160;</span> For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR40_0'>40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, after that Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all that were carried away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried away captive unto Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="JR40_2">2&#160;</span> And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_3">3&#160;</span> Now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath brought <span class='add'>it</span>, and done according as he hath said: because ye have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_4">4&#160;</span> And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which <span class='add'>were</span> upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all the land <span class='add'>is</span> before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go, thither go.
<span class="verse" id="JR40_5">5&#160;</span> Now while he was not yet gone back, <span class='add'>he said</span>, Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a reward, and let him go. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_6">6&#160;</span> Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Now when all the captains of the forces which <span class='add'>were</span> in the fields, <span class='add'>even</span> they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of them that were not carried away captive to Babylon; 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_8">8&#160;</span> Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Maachathite, they and their men. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_9">9&#160;</span> And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_10">10&#160;</span> As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah to serve the Chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer fruits, and oil, and put <span class='add'>them</span> in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken.
<span class="verse" id="JR40_11">11&#160;</span> Likewise when all the Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> in Moab, and among the Ammonites, and in Edom, and that <span class='add'>were</span> in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan; 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_12">12&#160;</span> Even all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits very much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that <span class='add'>were</span> in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_14">14&#160;</span> And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of the Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.
<span class="verse" id="JR40_15">15&#160;</span> Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know <span class='add'>it:</span> wherefore should he slay thee, that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee should be scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish? 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_16">16&#160;</span> But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR41_0'>41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass in the seventh month, <span class='add'>that</span> Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_2">2&#160;</span> Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_3">3&#160;</span> Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, <span class='add'>even</span> with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, <span class='add'>and</span> the men of war. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_4">4&#160;</span> And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew <span class='add'>it</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_5">5&#160;</span> That there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, <span class='add'>even</span> fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with offerings and incense in their hand, to bring <span class='add'>them</span> to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_6">6&#160;</span> And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.
<span class="verse" id="JR41_7">7&#160;</span>And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, <span class='add'>and cast them</span> into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_8">8&#160;</span> But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their brethren. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_9">9&#160;</span> Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, <span class='add'>was</span> it which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel: <span class='add'>and</span> Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with <span class='add'>them that were</span> slain.
<span class="verse" id="JR41_10">10&#160;</span> Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that <span class='add'>were</span> in Mizpah, <span class='add'>even</span> the king’s daughters, and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the Ammonites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_11">11&#160;</span>¶ But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done, 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_12">12&#160;</span> Then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that <span class='add'>are</span> in Gibeon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_13">13&#160;</span>Now it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when all the people which <span class='add'>were</span> with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, then they were glad. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_14">14&#160;</span> So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_15">15&#160;</span> But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the Ammonites. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_16">16&#160;</span> Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after <span class='add'>that</span> he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, <span class='add'>even</span> mighty men of war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again from Gibeon: 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_17">17&#160;</span> And they departed, and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham, which is by Beth-lehem, to go to enter into Egypt, 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_18">18&#160;</span> Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR42_0'>42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_1">1&#160;</span> Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even unto the greatest, came near, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_2">2&#160;</span> And said unto Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee, and pray for us unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, <span class='add'>even</span> for all this remnant; (for we are left <span class='add'>but</span> a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us:)
<span class="verse" id="JR42_3">3&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_4">4&#160;</span> Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard <span class='add'>you;</span> behold, I will pray unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God according to your words; and it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> whatsoever thing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall answer you, I will declare <span class='add'>it</span> unto you; I will keep nothing back from you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_5">5&#160;</span> Then they said to Jeremiah, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God shall send thee to us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_6">6&#160;</span>Whether <span class='add'>it be</span> good, or whether <span class='add'>it be</span> evil, we will obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jeremiah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_8">8&#160;</span> Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces which <span class='add'>were</span> with him, and all the people from the least even to the greatest, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_9">9&#160;</span> And said unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before him; 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_10">10&#160;</span> If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you, and not pull <span class='add'>you</span> down, and I will plant you, and not pluck <span class='add'>you</span> up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_11">11&#160;</span> Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for I <span class='add'>am</span> with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_12">12&#160;</span> And I will shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_13">13&#160;</span>¶ But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, neither obey the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_14">14&#160;</span> Saying, No; but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell: 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_15">15&#160;</span> And now therefore hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there; 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_16">16&#160;</span>Then it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after you there in Egypt; and there ye shall die.
<span class="verse" id="JR42_17">17&#160;</span> So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.
<span class="verse" id="JR42_18">18&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; As mine anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem; so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_19">19&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I have admonished you this day.
<span class="verse" id="JR42_20">20&#160;</span> For ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, saying, Pray for us unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God; and according unto all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we will do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR42_21">21&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>now</span> I have this day declared <span class='add'>it</span> to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, nor any <span class='add'>thing</span> for the which he hath sent me unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_22">22&#160;</span> Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go <span class='add'>and</span> to sojourn.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR43_0'>43</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR43_1">1&#160;</span>And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking unto all the people all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, for which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God had sent him to them, <span class='add'>even</span> all these words, 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_2">2&#160;</span> Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there: 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_3">3&#160;</span> But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, and carry us away captives into Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_4">4&#160;</span> So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to dwell in the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_5">5&#160;</span> But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all nations, whither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah; 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> men, and women, and children, and the king’s daughters, and every person that Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_7">7&#160;</span> So they came into the land of Egypt: for they obeyed not the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: thus came they <span class='add'>even</span> to Tahpanhes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR43_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_9">9&#160;</span> Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the clay in the brickkiln, which <span class='add'>is</span> at the entry of Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah; 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_10">10&#160;</span> And say unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_11">11&#160;</span> And when he cometh, he shall smite the land of Egypt, <span class='add'>and deliver</span> such <span class='add'>as are</span> for death to death; and such <span class='add'>as are</span> for captivity to captivity; and such <span class='add'>as are</span> for the sword to the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_12">12&#160;</span> And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captives: and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_13">13&#160;</span> He shall break also the images of Beth-shemesh, that <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he burn with fire.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR44_0'>44</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_1">1&#160;</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which dwell in the land of Egypt, which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and, behold, this day they <span class='add'>are</span> a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_3">3&#160;</span> Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, <span class='add'>and</span> to serve other gods, whom they knew not, <span class='add'>neither</span> they, ye, nor your fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_4">4&#160;</span> Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising early and sending <span class='add'>them</span>, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_5">5&#160;</span> But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_6">6&#160;</span> Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted <span class='add'>and</span> desolate, as at this day. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore now thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; Wherefore commit ye <span class='add'>this</span> great evil against your souls, to cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to leave you none to remain;
<span class="verse" id="JR44_8">8&#160;</span> In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth? 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_9">9&#160;</span> Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which they have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
<span class="verse" id="JR44_10">10&#160;</span> They are not humbled <span class='add'>even</span> unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_12">12&#160;</span> And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed, <span class='add'>and</span> fall in the land of Egypt; they shall <span class='add'>even</span> be consumed by the sword <span class='add'>and</span> by the famine: they shall die, from the least even unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be an execration, <span class='add'>and</span> an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_13">13&#160;</span> For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_14">14&#160;</span> So that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that they should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a desire to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as shall escape.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, we will not hearken unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_17">17&#160;</span> But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for <span class='add'>then</span> had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil.
<span class="verse" id="JR44_18">18&#160;</span> But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all <span class='add'>things</span>, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_19">19&#160;</span> And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Then Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, and to all the people which had given him <span class='add'>that</span> answer, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_21">21&#160;</span> The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> remember them, and came it <span class='add'>not</span> into his mind? 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_22">22&#160;</span> So that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings, <span class='add'>and</span> because of the abominations which ye have committed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_23">23&#160;</span> Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have not obeyed the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_24">24&#160;</span> Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women, Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all Judah that <span class='add'>are</span> in the land of Egypt: 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_25">25&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, saying; Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with your hand, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_26">26&#160;</span> Therefore hear ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all Judah that dwell in the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> liveth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_27">27&#160;</span> Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and all the men of Judah that <span class='add'>are</span> in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_28">28&#160;</span> Yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose words shall stand, mine, or theirs.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sign unto you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely stand against you for evil: 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_30">30&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will give Pharaoh-hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR45_0'>45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR45_1">1&#160;</span> The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR45_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch; 
<span class="verse" id="JR45_3">3&#160;</span> Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR45_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Thus shalt thou say unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith thus; Behold, <span class='add'>that</span> which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR45_5">5&#160;</span> And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek <span class='add'>them</span> not: for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR46_0'>46</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles; 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_2">2&#160;</span> Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaoh-necho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_3">3&#160;</span> Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_4">4&#160;</span> Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with <span class='add'>your</span> helmets; furbish the spears, <span class='add'>and</span> put on the brigandines. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_5">5&#160;</span> Wherefore have I seen them dismayed <span class='add'>and</span> turned away back? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and are fled apace, and look not back: <span class='add'>for</span> fear <span class='add'>was</span> round about, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR46_6">6&#160;</span> Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape; they shall stumble, and fall toward the north by the river Euphrates. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_7">7&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as the rivers? 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_8">8&#160;</span> Egypt riseth up like a flood, and <span class='add'>his</span> waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, <span class='add'>and</span> will cover the earth; I will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_9">9&#160;</span> Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle <span class='add'>and</span> bend the bow.
<span class="verse" id="JR46_10">10&#160;</span>For this <span class='add'>is</span> the day of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood: for the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_11">11&#160;</span> Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines; <span class='add'>for</span> thou shalt not be cured.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_12">12&#160;</span> The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the land: for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, <span class='add'>and</span> they are fallen both together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_13">13&#160;</span>¶ The word that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake to Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come <span class='add'>and</span> smite the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_14">14&#160;</span> Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee; for the sword shall devour round about thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_15">15&#160;</span> Why are thy valiant <span class='add'>men</span> swept away? they stood not, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did drive them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_16">16&#160;</span> He made many to fall, yea, one fell upon another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.
<span class="verse" id="JR46_17">17&#160;</span> They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt <span class='add'>is but</span> a noise; he hath passed the time appointed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the King, whose name <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, Surely as Tabor <span class='add'>is</span> among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, <span class='add'>so</span> shall he come. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_19">19&#160;</span> O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into captivity: for Noph shall be waste and desolate without an inhabitant.
<span class="verse" id="JR46_20">20&#160;</span> Egypt <span class='add'>is like</span> a very fair heifer, <span class='add'>but</span> destruction cometh; it cometh out of the north. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_21">21&#160;</span> Also her hired men <span class='add'>are</span> in the midst of her like fatted bullocks; for they also are turned back, <span class='add'>and</span> are fled away together: they did not stand, because the day of their calamity was come upon them, <span class='add'>and</span> the time of their visitation.
<span class="verse" id="JR46_22">22&#160;</span> The voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_23">23&#160;</span> They shall cut down her forest, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, though it cannot be searched; because they are more than the grasshoppers, and <span class='add'>are</span> innumerable. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_24">24&#160;</span> The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the north. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I will punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and <span class='add'>all</span> them that trust in him:
<span class="verse" id="JR46_26">26&#160;</span> And I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_27">27&#160;</span>¶ But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O Israel: for, behold, I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and be in rest and at ease, and none shall make <span class='add'>him</span> afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_28">28&#160;</span> Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for I <span class='add'>am</span> with thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee: but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR47_0'>47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.
<span class="verse" id="JR47_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the land, and all that is therein; the city, and them that dwell therein: then the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl.
<span class="verse" id="JR47_3">3&#160;</span> At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong <span class='add'>horses</span>, at the rushing of his chariots, <span class='add'>and at</span> the rumbling of his wheels, the fathers shall not look back to <span class='add'>their</span> children for feebleness of hands; 
<span class="verse" id="JR47_4">4&#160;</span> Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines, <span class='add'>and</span> to cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of Caphtor.
<span class="verse" id="JR47_5">5&#160;</span> Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is cut off <span class='add'>with</span> the remnant of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself? 
<span class="verse" id="JR47_6">6&#160;</span> O thou sword of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, how long <span class='add'>will it be</span> ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still.
<span class="verse" id="JR47_7">7&#160;</span> How can it be quiet, seeing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed it.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR48_0'>48</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_1">1&#160;</span> Against Moab thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded <span class='add'>and</span> taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There shall be</span> no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from <span class='add'>being</span> a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_3">3&#160;</span> A voice of crying <span class='add'>shall be</span> from Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_4">4&#160;</span> Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_5">5&#160;</span> For in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up; for in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of destruction.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_6">6&#160;</span> Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_7">7&#160;</span>¶ For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity <span class='add'>with</span> his priests and his princes together. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_8">8&#160;</span> And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape: the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_9">9&#160;</span> Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get away: for the cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_10">10&#160;</span> Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that doeth the work of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> deceitfully, and cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that keepeth back his sword from blood.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_13">13&#160;</span> And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Beth-el their confidence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_14">14&#160;</span>¶ How say ye, We <span class='add'>are</span> mighty and strong men for the war? 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_15">15&#160;</span> Moab is spoiled, and gone up <span class='add'>out of</span> her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_16">16&#160;</span> The calamity of Moab <span class='add'>is</span> near to come, and his affliction hasteth fast. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_17">17&#160;</span> All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staff broken, <span class='add'>and</span> the beautiful rod! 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_18">18&#160;</span> Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from <span class='add'>thy</span> glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, <span class='add'>and</span> he shall destroy thy strong holds. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_19">19&#160;</span> O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that fleeth, and her that escapeth, <span class='add'>and</span> say, What is done?
<span class="verse" id="JR48_20">20&#160;</span> Moab is confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled, 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_21">21&#160;</span> And judgment is come upon the plain country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath, 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_22">22&#160;</span> And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim, 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_23">23&#160;</span> And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon, 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_24">24&#160;</span> And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_25">25&#160;</span> The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Make ye him drunken: for he magnified <span class='add'>himself</span> against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_27">27&#160;</span> For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_28">28&#160;</span> O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove <span class='add'>that</span> maketh her nest in the sides of the hole’s mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_29">29&#160;</span> We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of his heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_30">30&#160;</span> I know his wrath, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; but <span class='add'>it shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> so; his lies shall not so effect <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_31">31&#160;</span> Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab; <span class='add'>mine heart</span> shall mourn for the men of Kir-heres. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_32">32&#160;</span> O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach <span class='add'>even</span> to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_33">33&#160;</span> And joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to fail from the winepresses: none shall tread with shouting; <span class='add'>their</span> shouting <span class='add'>shall be</span> no shouting. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_34">34&#160;</span> From the cry of Heshbon <span class='add'>even</span> unto Elealeh, <span class='add'>and even</span> unto Jahaz, have they uttered their voice, from Zoar <span class='add'>even</span> unto Horonaim, <span class='add'>as</span> an heifer of three years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shall be desolate.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_35">35&#160;</span> Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, him that offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_36">36&#160;</span> Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kir-heres: because the riches <span class='add'>that</span> he hath gotten are perished. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_37">37&#160;</span> For every head <span class='add'>shall be</span> bald, and every beard clipped: upon all the hands <span class='add'>shall be</span> cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There shall be</span> lamentation generally upon all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets thereof: for I have broken Moab like a vessel wherein <span class='add'>is</span> no pleasure, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_39">39&#160;</span> They shall howl, <span class='add'>saying</span>, How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a dismaying to all them about him.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_40">40&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread his wings over Moab. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_41">41&#160;</span> Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty men’s hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_42">42&#160;</span> And Moab shall be destroyed from <span class='add'>being</span> a people, because he hath magnified <span class='add'>himself</span> against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_43">43&#160;</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare, <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_44">44&#160;</span> He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will bring upon it, <span class='add'>even</span> upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR48_45">45&#160;</span> They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.
<span class="verse" id="JR48_46">46&#160;</span> Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_47">47&#160;</span>¶ Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Thus far <span class='add'>is</span> the judgment of Moab.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR49_0'>49</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_1">1&#160;</span> Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Hath Israel no sons? hath he no heir? why <span class='add'>then</span> doth their king inherit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities?
<span class="verse" id="JR49_2">2&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_3">3&#160;</span> Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rabbah, gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for their king shall go into captivity, <span class='add'>and</span> his priests and his princes together.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_4">4&#160;</span> Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Who shall come unto me?
<span class="verse" id="JR49_5">5&#160;</span> Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather up him that wandereth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_6">6&#160;</span> And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of Ammon, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Concerning Edom, thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; <span class='add'>Is</span> wisdom no more in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished? 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_8">8&#160;</span> Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants of Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time <span class='add'>that</span> I will visit him.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_9">9&#160;</span> If grapegatherers come to thee, would they not leave <span class='add'>some</span> gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, they will destroy till they have enough.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_10">10&#160;</span> But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and he <span class='add'>is</span> not. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_11">11&#160;</span> Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve <span class='add'>them</span> alive; and let thy widows trust in me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_12">12&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, they whose judgment <span class='add'>was</span> not to drink of the cup have assuredly drunken; and <span class='add'>art</span> thou he <span class='add'>that</span> shall altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink <span class='add'>of it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_13">13&#160;</span> For I have sworn by myself, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that Bozrah shall become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_14">14&#160;</span> I have heard a rumour from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and an ambassador is sent unto the heathen, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Gather ye together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_15">15&#160;</span> For, lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, <span class='add'>and</span> despised among men. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_16">16&#160;</span> Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, <span class='add'>and</span> the pride of thine heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_17">17&#160;</span> Also Edom shall be a desolation: every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_18">18&#160;</span> As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour <span class='add'>cities</span> thereof, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_19">19&#160;</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan against the habitation of the strong: but I will suddenly make him run away from her: and who <span class='add'>is</span> a chosen <span class='add'>man, that</span> I may appoint over her? for who <span class='add'>is</span> like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who <span class='add'>is</span> that shepherd that will stand before me?
<span class="verse" id="JR49_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore hear the counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitations desolate with them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_21">21&#160;</span> The earth is moved at the noise of their fall, at the cry the noise thereof was heard in the Red sea.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_22">22&#160;</span> Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and at that day shall the heart of the mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; <span class='add'>there is</span> sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_24">24&#160;</span> Damascus is waxed feeble, <span class='add'>and</span> turneth herself to flee, and fear hath seized on <span class='add'>her:</span> anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in travail. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_25">25&#160;</span> How is the city of praise not left, the city of my joy! 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_26">26&#160;</span> Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_27">27&#160;</span> And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall consume the palaces of Ben-hadad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_29">29&#160;</span> Their tents and their flocks shall they take away: they shall take to themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their camels; and they shall cry unto them, Fear <span class='add'>is</span> on every side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_31">31&#160;</span> Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without care, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which have neither gates nor bars, <span class='add'>which</span> dwell alone.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_32">32&#160;</span> And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their cattle a spoil: and I will scatter into all winds them <span class='add'>that are</span> in the utmost corners; and I will bring their calamity from all sides thereof, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR49_33">33&#160;</span> And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons, <span class='add'>and</span> a desolation for ever: there shall no man abide there, nor <span class='add'>any</span> son of man dwell in it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_34">34&#160;</span>¶ The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that came to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_35">35&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_36">36&#160;</span> And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_37">37&#160;</span> For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life: and I will bring evil upon them, <span class='add'>even</span> my fierce anger, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them: 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_38">38&#160;</span> And I will set my throne in Elam, and will destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_39">39&#160;</span>¶ But it shall come to pass in the latter days, <span class='add'>that</span> I will bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR50_0'>50</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_1">1&#160;</span> The word that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake against Babylon <span class='add'>and</span> against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_2">2&#160;</span> Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, <span class='add'>and</span> conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_3">3&#160;</span> For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall remove, they shall depart, both man and beast. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_4">4&#160;</span>¶ In those days, and in that time, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and weeping: they shall go, and seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_5">5&#160;</span> They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Come, and let us join ourselves to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in a perpetual covenant <span class='add'>that</span> shall not be forgotten. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_6">6&#160;</span> My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away <span class='add'>on</span> the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_7">7&#160;</span> All that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said, We offend not, because they have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the habitation of justice, even the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the hope of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_8">8&#160;</span> Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before the flocks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_9">9&#160;</span>¶ For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an assembly of great nations from the north country: and they shall set themselves in array against her; from thence she shall be taken: their arrows <span class='add'>shall be</span> as of a mighty expert man; none shall return in vain.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_10">10&#160;</span> And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be satisfied, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_11">11&#160;</span> Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and bellow as bulls;
<span class="verse" id="JR50_12">12&#160;</span> Your mother shall be sore confounded; she that bare you shall be ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations <span class='add'>shall be</span> a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_13">13&#160;</span> Because of the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> it shall not be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_14">14&#160;</span> Put yourselves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_15">15&#160;</span> Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it <span class='add'>is</span> the vengeance of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do unto her. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_16">16&#160;</span> Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own land.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Israel <span class='add'>is</span> a scattered sheep; the lions have driven <span class='add'>him</span> away: first the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and last this Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_18">18&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_19">19&#160;</span> And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_20">20&#160;</span> In those days, and in that time, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and <span class='add'>there shall be</span> none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Go up against the land of Merathaim, <span class='add'>even</span> against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and do according to all that I have commanded thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_22">22&#160;</span> A sound of battle <span class='add'>is</span> in the land, and of great destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_23">23&#160;</span> How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations! 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_24">24&#160;</span> I have laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this <span class='add'>is</span> the work of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_26">26&#160;</span> Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses: cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be left.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_27">27&#160;</span> Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_28">28&#160;</span> The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, the vengeance of his temple. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_29">29&#160;</span> Call together the archers against Babylon: all ye that bend the bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense her according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do unto her: for she hath been proud against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, against the Holy One of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_31">31&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, <span class='add'>O thou</span> most proud, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of hosts: for thy day is come, the time <span class='add'>that</span> I will visit thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_32">32&#160;</span> And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all round about him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; The children of Israel and the children of Judah <span class='add'>were</span> oppressed together: and all that took them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_34">34&#160;</span> Their Redeemer <span class='add'>is</span> strong; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name: he shall throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_35">35&#160;</span>¶ A sword <span class='add'>is</span> upon the Chaldeans, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise <span class='add'>men</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_36">36&#160;</span> A sword <span class='add'>is</span> upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword <span class='add'>is</span> upon her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.
<span class="verse" id="JR50_37">37&#160;</span> A sword <span class='add'>is</span> upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mingled people that <span class='add'>are</span> in the midst of her; and they shall become as women: a sword <span class='add'>is</span> upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_38">38&#160;</span> A drought <span class='add'>is</span> upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it <span class='add'>is</span> the land of graven images, and they are mad upon <span class='add'>their</span> idols. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_39">39&#160;</span> Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of the islands shall dwell <span class='add'>there</span>, and the owls shall dwell therein: and it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_40">40&#160;</span> As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour <span class='add'>cities</span> thereof, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; <span class='add'>so</span> shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_41">41&#160;</span> Behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation, and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_42">42&#160;</span> They shall hold the bow and the lance: they <span class='add'>are</span> cruel, and will not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall ride upon horses, <span class='add'>every one</span> put in array, like a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_43">43&#160;</span> The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble: anguish took hold of him, <span class='add'>and</span> pangs as of a woman in travail. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_44">44&#160;</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan unto the habitation of the strong: but I will make them suddenly run away from her: and who <span class='add'>is</span> a chosen <span class='add'>man, that</span> I may appoint over her? for who <span class='add'>is</span> like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who <span class='add'>is</span> that shepherd that will stand before me?
<span class="verse" id="JR50_45">45&#160;</span> Therefore hear ye the counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make <span class='add'>their</span> habitation desolate with them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR50_46">46&#160;</span> At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR51_0'>51</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind;
<span class="verse" id="JR51_2">2&#160;</span> And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_3">3&#160;</span>Against <span class='add'>him that</span> bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against <span class='add'>him that</span> lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye utterly all her host. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_4">4&#160;</span> Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and <span class='add'>they that are</span> thrust through in her streets. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_5">5&#160;</span> For Israel <span class='add'>hath</span> not <span class='add'>been</span> forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_6">6&#160;</span> Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in her iniquity; for this <span class='add'>is</span> the time of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_7">7&#160;</span> Babylon <span class='add'>hath been</span> a golden cup in the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> hand, that made all the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_8">8&#160;</span> Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_9">9&#160;</span> We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up <span class='add'>even</span> to the skies. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_10">10&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_11">11&#160;</span> Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device <span class='add'>is</span> against Babylon, to destroy it; because it <span class='add'>is</span> the vengeance of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the vengeance of his temple.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_12">12&#160;</span> Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_13">13&#160;</span> O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, <span class='add'>and</span> the measure of thy covetousness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_14">14&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts hath sworn by himself, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Surely I will fill thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a shout against thee.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_15">15&#160;</span> He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_16">16&#160;</span> When he uttereth <span class='add'>his</span> voice, <span class='add'>there is</span> a multitude of waters in the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_17">17&#160;</span> Every man is brutish by <span class='add'>his</span> knowledge; every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image <span class='add'>is</span> falsehood, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no breath in them.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_18">18&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their visitation they shall perish. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_19">19&#160;</span> The portion of Jacob <span class='add'>is</span> not like them; for he <span class='add'>is</span> the former of all things: and <span class='add'>Israel is</span> the rod of his inheritance: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> his name. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_20">20&#160;</span>Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my battle axe <span class='add'>and</span> weapons of war: for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;
<span class="verse" id="JR51_21">21&#160;</span> And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider; and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider; 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_22">22&#160;</span> With thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in pieces the young man and the maid; 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_23">23&#160;</span> I will also break in pieces with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break in pieces captains and rulers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_24">24&#160;</span> And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_25">25&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_26">26&#160;</span> And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_27">27&#160;</span> Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_28">28&#160;</span> Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of his dominion. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_29">29&#160;</span> And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_30">30&#160;</span> The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained in <span class='add'>their</span> holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_31">31&#160;</span> One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at <span class='add'>one</span> end, 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_32">32&#160;</span> And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_33">33&#160;</span> For thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon <span class='add'>is</span> like a threshingfloor, <span class='add'>it is</span> time to thresh her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_34">34&#160;</span> Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath cast me out. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_35">35&#160;</span> The violence done to me and to my flesh <span class='add'>be</span> upon Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_36">36&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her springs dry. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_37">37&#160;</span> And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwellingplace for dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_38">38&#160;</span> They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions’ whelps.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_39">39&#160;</span> In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_40">40&#160;</span> I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he goats. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_41">41&#160;</span> How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations! 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_42">42&#160;</span> The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_43">43&#160;</span> Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth <span class='add'>any</span> son of man pass thereby. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_44">44&#160;</span> And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_45">45&#160;</span> My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_46">46&#160;</span> And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall be heard in the land; a rumour shall both come <span class='add'>one</span> year, and after that in <span class='add'>another</span> year <span class='add'>shall come</span> a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_47">47&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_48">48&#160;</span> Then the heaven and the earth, and all that <span class='add'>is</span> therein, shall sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_49">49&#160;</span> As Babylon <span class='add'>hath caused</span> the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_50">50&#160;</span> Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still: remember the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_51">51&#160;</span> We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_52">52&#160;</span> Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that I will do judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded shall groan. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_53">53&#160;</span> Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, <span class='add'> yet</span> from me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_54">54&#160;</span> A sound of a cry <span class='add'>cometh</span> from Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans: 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_55">55&#160;</span> Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered: 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_56">56&#160;</span> Because the spoiler is come upon her, <span class='add'>even</span> upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of recompences shall surely requite. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_57">57&#160;</span> And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise <span class='add'>men</span>, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_58">58&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they shall be weary.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_59">59&#160;</span>¶ The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And <span class='add'>this</span> Seraiah <span class='add'>was</span> a quiet prince.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_60">60&#160;</span> So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon Babylon, <span class='add'>even</span> all these words that are written against Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_61">61&#160;</span> And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt see, and shalt read all these words; 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_62">62&#160;</span> Then shalt thou say, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate for ever.
<span class="verse" id="JR51_63">63&#160;</span> And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this book, <span class='add'>that</span> thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates: 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_64">64&#160;</span> And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and they shall be weary. Thus far <span class='add'>are</span> the words of Jeremiah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR52_0'>52</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_1">1&#160;</span> Zedekiah <span class='add'>was</span> one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
<span class="verse" id="JR52_2">2&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to all that Jehoiakim had done. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_3">3&#160;</span> For through the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah, till he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it, and built forts against it round about. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_5">5&#160;</span> So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_6">6&#160;</span> And in the fourth month, in the ninth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_7">7&#160;</span> Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which <span class='add'>was</span> by the king’s garden; (now the Chaldeans <span class='add'>were</span> by the city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_8">8&#160;</span>¶ But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_9">9&#160;</span> Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_10">10&#160;</span> And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_11">11&#160;</span> Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Now in the fifth month, in the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, which <span class='add'>was</span> the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, came Nebuzar-adan, captain of the guard, <span class='add'>which</span> served the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem,
<span class="verse" id="JR52_13">13&#160;</span> And burned the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the king’s house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of the great <span class='add'>men</span>, burned he with fire: 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_14">14&#160;</span> And all the army of the Chaldeans, that <span class='add'>were</span> with the captain of the guard, brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_15">15&#160;</span> Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard carried away captive <span class='add'>certain</span> of the poor of the people, and the residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_16">16&#160;</span> But Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard left <span class='add'>certain</span> of the poor of the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_17">17&#160;</span> Also the pillars of brass that <span class='add'>were</span> in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the bases, and the brasen sea that <span class='add'>was</span> in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_18">18&#160;</span> The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered, took they away.
<span class="verse" id="JR52_19">19&#160;</span> And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>was</span> of gold <span class='add'>in</span> gold, and <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>was</span> of silver <span class='add'>in</span> silver, took the captain of the guard away.
<span class="verse" id="JR52_20">20&#160;</span> The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that <span class='add'>were</span> under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
<span class="verse" id="JR52_21">21&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>concerning</span> the pillars, the height of one pillar <span class='add'>was</span> eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the thickness thereof <span class='add'>was</span> four fingers: <span class='add'>it was</span> hollow.
<span class="verse" id="JR52_22">22&#160;</span> And a chapiter of brass <span class='add'>was</span> upon it; and the height of one chapiter <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the chapiters round about, all <span class='add'>of</span> brass. The second pillar also and the pomegranates <span class='add'>were</span> like unto these. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_23">23&#160;</span> And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; <span class='add'>and</span> all the pomegranates upon the network <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door:
<span class="verse" id="JR52_25">25&#160;</span> He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king’s person, which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.
<span class="verse" id="JR52_26">26&#160;</span> So Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_27">27&#160;</span> And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away captive out of his own land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_28">28&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty: 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_29">29&#160;</span> In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons:
<span class="verse" id="JR52_30">30&#160;</span> In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: all the persons <span class='add'>were</span> four thousand and six hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> Evil-merodach king of Babylon in the <span class='add'>first</span> year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison, 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_32">32&#160;</span> And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that <span class='add'>were</span> with him in Babylon,
<span class="verse" id="JR52_33">33&#160;</span> And changed his prison garments: and he did continually eat bread before him all the days of his life. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_34">34&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>for</span> his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life.</div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
