<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Azariah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Azariah</a></li>
</ul>
<div class='main' id='PA0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Prayer of Azariah  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PA1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="PA1_1">1&#160;</span>And they walked in the midst of the fire, praising God, and blessing the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_2">2&#160;</span>Then Azarias stood up, and prayed on this manner; and opening his mouth in the midst of the fire said, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_3">3&#160;</span>Blessed art thou, O Lord God of our fathers: thy name is worthy to be praised and glorified for evermore: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_4">4&#160;</span>For thou art righteous in all the things that thou hast done to us: yea, true are all thy works, thy ways are right, and all thy judgments truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_5">5&#160;</span>In all the things that thou hast brought upon us, and upon the holy city of our fathers, even Jerusalem, thou hast executed true judgment: for according to truth and judgment didst thou bring all these things upon us because of our sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_6">6&#160;</span>For we have sinned and committed iniquity, departing from thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_7">7&#160;</span>In all things have we trespassed, and not obeyed thy commandments, nor kept them, neither done as thou hast commanded us, that it might go well with us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_8">8&#160;</span>Wherefore all that thou hast brought upon us, and every thing that thou hast done to us, thou hast done in true judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_9">9&#160;</span>And thou didst deliver us into the hands of lawless enemies, most hateful forsakers of God, and to an unjust king, and the most wicked in all the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_10">10&#160;</span>And now we cannot open our mouths, we are become a shame and reproach to thy servants; and to them that worship thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_11">11&#160;</span>Yet deliver us not up wholly, for thy name’s sake, neither disannul thou thy covenant: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_12">12&#160;</span>And cause not thy mercy to depart from us, for thy beloved Abraham’s sake, for thy servant Issac’s sake, and for thy holy Israel’s sake; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_13">13&#160;</span>To whom thou hast spoken and promised, that thou wouldest multiply their seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand that lieth upon the seashore. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_14">14&#160;</span>For we, O Lord, are become less than any nation, and be kept under this day in all the world because of our sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_15">15&#160;</span>Neither is there at this time prince, or prophet, or leader, or burnt offering, or sacrifice, or oblation, or incense, or place to sacrifice before thee, and to find mercy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_16">16&#160;</span>Nevertheless in a contrite heart and an humble spirit let us be accepted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_17">17&#160;</span>Like as in the burnt offerings of rams and bullocks, and like as in ten thousands of fat lambs: so let our sacrifice be in thy sight this day, and grant that we may wholly go after thee: for they shall not be confounded that put their trust in thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_18">18&#160;</span>And now we follow thee with all our heart, we fear thee, and seek thy face. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_19">19&#160;</span>Put us not to shame: but deal with us after thy lovingkindness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_20">20&#160;</span>Deliver us also according to thy marvellous works, and give glory to thy name, O Lord: and let all them that do thy servants hurt be ashamed; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_21">21&#160;</span>And let them be confounded in all their power and might, and let their strength be broken; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_22">22&#160;</span>And let them know that thou art God, the only God, and glorious over the whole world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_23">23&#160;</span>And the king’s servants, that put them in, ceased not to make the oven hot with rosin, pitch, tow, and small wood; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_24">24&#160;</span>So that the flame streamed forth above the furnace forty and nine cubits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_25">25&#160;</span>And it passed through, and burned those Chaldeans it found about the furnace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_26">26&#160;</span>But the angel of the Lord came down into the oven together with Azarias and his fellows, and smote the flame of the fire out of the oven; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_27">27&#160;</span>And made the midst of the furnace as it had been a moist whistling wind, so that the fire touched them not at all, neither hurt nor troubled them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_28">28&#160;</span>Then the three, as out of one mouth, praised, glorified, and blessed, God in the furnace, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_29">29&#160;</span>Blessed art thou, O Lord God of our fathers: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_30">30&#160;</span>And blessed is thy glorious and holy name: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_31">31&#160;</span>Blessed art thou in the temple of thine holy glory: and to be praised and glorified above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_32">32&#160;</span>Blessed art thou that beholdest the depths, and sittest upon the cherubims: and to be praised and exalted above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_33">33&#160;</span>Blessed art thou on the glorious throne of thy kingdom: and to be praised and glorified above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_34">34&#160;</span>Blessed art thou in the firmament of heaven: and above all to be praised and glorified for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_35">35&#160;</span>O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_36">36&#160;</span>O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_37">37&#160;</span>O ye angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_38">38&#160;</span>O all ye waters that be above the heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_39">39&#160;</span>O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_40">40&#160;</span>O ye sun and moon, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_41">41&#160;</span>O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_42">42&#160;</span>O every shower and dew, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_43">43&#160;</span>O all ye winds, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_44">44&#160;</span>O ye fire and heat, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_45">45&#160;</span>O ye winter and summer, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_46">46&#160;</span>O ye dews and storms of snow, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_47">47&#160;</span>O ye nights and days, bless ye the Lord: bless and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_48">48&#160;</span>O ye light and darkness, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_49">49&#160;</span>O ye ice and cold, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_50">50&#160;</span>O ye frost and snow, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_51">51&#160;</span>O ye lightnings and clouds, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_52">52&#160;</span>O let the earth bless the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_53">53&#160;</span>O ye mountains and little hills, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_54">54&#160;</span>O all ye things that grow in the earth, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_55">55&#160;</span>O ye mountains, bless ye the Lord: Praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_56">56&#160;</span>O ye seas and rivers, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_57">57&#160;</span>O ye whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_58">58&#160;</span>O all ye fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_59">59&#160;</span>O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_60">60&#160;</span>O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_61">61&#160;</span>O Israel, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_62">62&#160;</span>O ye priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_63">63&#160;</span>O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_64">64&#160;</span>O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_65">65&#160;</span>O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_66">66&#160;</span>O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord: praise and exalt him above all for ever: for he hath delivered us from hell, and saved us from the hand of death, and delivered us out of the midst of the furnace and burning flame: even out of the midst of the fire hath he delivered us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_67">67&#160;</span>O give thanks unto the Lord, because he is gracious: for his mercy endureth for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PA1_68">68&#160;</span>O all ye that worship the Lord, bless the God of gods, praise him, and give him thanks: for his mercy endureth for ever. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
