<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 1 Chronicles 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Chronicles</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R15_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R16_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R17_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R18_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R19_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R110_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R111_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R112_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R113_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R114_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R115_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R116_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R117_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R118_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R119_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R120_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R121_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R122_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R123_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R124_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R125_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R126_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R127_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R128_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='1CH.xhtml#R129_0'>29</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='R10_0'>

<div class='mt'>The First Book of the Chronicles  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R11_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="R11_1">1&#160;</span> Adam, Sheth, Enosh, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_2">2&#160;</span> Kenan, Mahalaleel, Jered, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_3">3&#160;</span> Henoch, Methuselah, Lamech, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_4">4&#160;</span> Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_5">5&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_6">6&#160;</span> And the sons of Gomer; Ashchenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
<span class="verse" id="R11_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_8">8&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_9">9&#160;</span> And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raamah, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_10">10&#160;</span> And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be mighty upon the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_11">11&#160;</span> And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_12">12&#160;</span> And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of whom came the Philistines,) and Caphthorim. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_13">13&#160;</span> And Canaan begat Zidon his firstborn, and Heth, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_14">14&#160;</span> The Jebusite also, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_15">15&#160;</span> And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_16">16&#160;</span> And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_17">17&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.
<span class="verse" id="R11_18">18&#160;</span> And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_19">19&#160;</span> And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Peleg; because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Joktan.
<span class="verse" id="R11_20">20&#160;</span> And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_21">21&#160;</span> Hadoram also, and Uzal, and Diklah, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_22">22&#160;</span> And Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_23">23&#160;</span> And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Joktan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_25">25&#160;</span> Eber, Peleg, Reu, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_26">26&#160;</span> Serug, Nahor, Terah, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_27">27&#160;</span> Abram; the same <span class='add'>is</span> Abraham. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_28">28&#160;</span> The sons of Abraham; Isaac, and Ishmael. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_29">29&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> their generations: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_30">30&#160;</span> Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,
<span class="verse" id="R11_31">31&#160;</span> Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Now the sons of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: she bare Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan; Sheba, and Dedan. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_33">33&#160;</span> And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Keturah. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_34">34&#160;</span> And Abraham begat Isaac. The sons of Isaac; Esau and Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_35">35&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_36">36&#160;</span> The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.
<span class="verse" id="R11_37">37&#160;</span> The sons of Reuel; Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_38">38&#160;</span> And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_39">39&#160;</span> And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and Homam: and Timna <span class='add'>was</span> Lotan’s sister.
<span class="verse" id="R11_40">40&#160;</span> The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. And the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah.
<span class="verse" id="R11_41">41&#160;</span> The sons of Anah; Dishon. And the sons of Dishon; Amram, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
<span class="verse" id="R11_42">42&#160;</span> The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, <span class='add'>and</span> Jakan. The sons of Dishan; Uz, and Aran.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_43">43&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before <span class='add'>any</span> king reigned over the children of Israel; Bela the son of Beor: and the name of his city <span class='add'>was</span> Dinhabah. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_44">44&#160;</span> And when Bela was dead, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_45">45&#160;</span> And when Jobab was dead, Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_46">46&#160;</span> And when Husham was dead, Hadad the son of Bedad, which smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city <span class='add'>was</span> Avith. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_47">47&#160;</span> And when Hadad was dead, Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_48">48&#160;</span> And when Samlah was dead, Shaul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_49">49&#160;</span> And when Shaul was dead, Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R11_50">50&#160;</span> And when Baal-hanan was dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: and the name of his city <span class='add'>was</span> Pai; and his wife’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R11_51">51&#160;</span>¶ Hadad died also. And the dukes of Edom were; duke Timnah, duke Aliah, duke Jetheth, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_52">52&#160;</span> Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_53">53&#160;</span> Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar, 
<span class="verse" id="R11_54">54&#160;</span> Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These <span class='add'>are</span> the dukes of Edom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R12_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Israel; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun,
<span class="verse" id="R12_2">2&#160;</span> Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_3">3&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah: <span class='add'>which</span> three were born unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, the firstborn of Judah, was evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and he slew him. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_4">4&#160;</span> And Tamar his daughter in law bare him Pharez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah <span class='add'>were</span> five. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_5">5&#160;</span> The sons of Pharez; Hezron, and Hamul. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_6">6&#160;</span> And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in all.
<span class="verse" id="R12_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Carmi; Achar, the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the thing accursed.
<span class="verse" id="R12_8">8&#160;</span> And the sons of Ethan; Azariah. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_9">9&#160;</span> The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him; Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.
<span class="verse" id="R12_10">10&#160;</span> And Ram begat Amminadab; and Amminadab begat Nahshon, prince of the children of Judah; 
<span class="verse" id="R12_11">11&#160;</span> And Nahshon begat Salma, and Salma begat Boaz,
<span class="verse" id="R12_12">12&#160;</span> And Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Jesse, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And Jesse begat his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimma the third,
<span class="verse" id="R12_14">14&#160;</span> Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth, 
<span class="verse" id="R12_15">15&#160;</span> Ozem the sixth, David the seventh: 
<span class="verse" id="R12_16">16&#160;</span> Whose sisters <span class='add'>were</span> Zeruiah, and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah; Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_17">17&#160;</span> And Abigail bare Amasa: and the father of Amasa <span class='add'>was</span> Jether the Ishmeelite.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Caleb the son of Hezron begat <span class='add'>children</span> of Azubah <span class='add'>his</span> wife, and of Jerioth: her sons <span class='add'>are</span> these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_19">19&#160;</span> And when Azubah was dead, Caleb took unto him Ephrath, which bare him Hur. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_20">20&#160;</span> And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he married when he <span class='add'>was</span> threescore years old; and she bare him Segub.
<span class="verse" id="R12_22">22&#160;</span> And Segub begat Jair, who had three and twenty cities in the land of Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_23">23&#160;</span> And he took Geshur, and Aram, with the towns of Jair, from them, with Kenath, and the towns thereof, <span class='add'>even</span> threescore cities. All these <span class='add'>belonged to</span> the sons of Machir the father of Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_24">24&#160;</span> And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb-ephratah, then Abiah Hezron’s wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, <span class='add'>and</span> Ahijah. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_26">26&#160;</span> Jerahmeel had also another wife, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Atarah; she <span class='add'>was</span> the mother of Onam. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_27">27&#160;</span> And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were, Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_28">28&#160;</span> And the sons of Onam were, Shammai, and Jada. And the sons of Shammai; Nadab, and Abishur. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_29">29&#160;</span> And the name of the wife of Abishur <span class='add'>was</span> Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, and Molid. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_30">30&#160;</span> And the sons of Nadab; Seled, and Appaim: but Seled died without children. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_31">31&#160;</span> And the sons of Appaim; Ishi. And the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And the children of Sheshan; Ahlai. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_32">32&#160;</span> And the sons of Jada the brother of Shammai; Jether, and Jonathan: and Jether died without children. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_33">33&#160;</span> And the sons of Jonathan; Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_34">34&#160;</span>¶ Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Jarha. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_35">35&#160;</span> And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife; and she bare him Attai. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_36">36&#160;</span> And Attai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad, 
<span class="verse" id="R12_37">37&#160;</span> And Zabad begat Ephlal, and Ephlal begat Obed, 
<span class="verse" id="R12_38">38&#160;</span> And Obed begat Jehu, and Jehu begat Azariah, 
<span class="verse" id="R12_39">39&#160;</span> And Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begat Eleasah, 
<span class="verse" id="R12_40">40&#160;</span> And Eleasah begat Sisamai, and Sisamai begat Shallum, 
<span class="verse" id="R12_41">41&#160;</span> And Shallum begat Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begat Elishama. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_42">42&#160;</span>¶ Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel <span class='add'>were</span>, Mesha his firstborn, which was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_43">43&#160;</span> And the sons of Hebron; Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_44">44&#160;</span> And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat Shammai. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_45">45&#160;</span> And the son of Shammai <span class='add'>was</span> Maon: and Maon <span class='add'>was</span> the father of Beth-zur. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_46">46&#160;</span> And Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez: and Haran begat Gazez. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_47">47&#160;</span> And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Geshan, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_48">48&#160;</span> Maachah, Caleb’s concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_49">49&#160;</span> She bare also Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb <span class='add'>was</span> Achsah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R12_50">50&#160;</span>¶ These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah; Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim,
<span class="verse" id="R12_51">51&#160;</span> Salma the father of Beth-lehem, Hareph the father of Beth-gader. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_52">52&#160;</span> And Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim had sons; Haroeh, <span class='add'>and</span> half of the Manahethites.
<span class="verse" id="R12_53">53&#160;</span> And the families of Kirjath-jearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites. 
<span class="verse" id="R12_54">54&#160;</span> The sons of Salma; Beth-lehem, and the Netophathites, Ataroth, the house of Joab, and half of the Manahethites, the Zorites.
<span class="verse" id="R12_55">55&#160;</span> And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, <span class='add'>and</span> Suchathites. These <span class='add'>are</span> the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R13_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R13_1">1&#160;</span> Now these were the sons of David, which were born unto him in Hebron; the firstborn Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess:
<span class="verse" id="R13_2">2&#160;</span> The third, Absalom the son of Maachah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur: the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith: 
<span class="verse" id="R13_3">3&#160;</span> The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital: the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>These</span> six were born unto him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_5">5&#160;</span> And these were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath-shua the daughter of Ammiel:
<span class="verse" id="R13_6">6&#160;</span> Ibhar also, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,
<span class="verse" id="R13_7">7&#160;</span> And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 
<span class="verse" id="R13_8">8&#160;</span> And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.
<span class="verse" id="R13_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>These were</span> all the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines, and Tamar their sister. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R13_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon’s son <span class='add'>was</span> Rehoboam, Abia his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
<span class="verse" id="R13_11">11&#160;</span> Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
<span class="verse" id="R13_12">12&#160;</span> Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
<span class="verse" id="R13_13">13&#160;</span> Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R13_14">14&#160;</span> Amon his son, Josiah his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_15">15&#160;</span> And the sons of Josiah <span class='add'>were</span>, the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.
<span class="verse" id="R13_16">16&#160;</span> And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R13_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Jeconiah; Assir, Salathiel his son,
<span class="verse" id="R13_18">18&#160;</span> Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_19">19&#160;</span> And the sons of Pedaiah <span class='add'>were</span>, Zerubbabel, and Shimei: and the sons of Zerubbabel; Meshullam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister: 
<span class="verse" id="R13_20">20&#160;</span> And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab-hesed, five. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_21">21&#160;</span> And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_22">22&#160;</span> And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah; Hattush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six. 
<span class="verse" id="R13_23">23&#160;</span> And the sons of Neariah; Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, three.
<span class="verse" id="R13_24">24&#160;</span> And the sons of Elioenai <span class='add'>were</span>, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R14_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_1">1&#160;</span> The sons of Judah; Pharez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.
<span class="verse" id="R14_2">2&#160;</span> And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai, and Lahad. These <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Zorathites.
<span class="verse" id="R14_3">3&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>were of</span> the father of Etam; Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash: and the name of their sister <span class='add'>was</span> Hazelelponi: 
<span class="verse" id="R14_4">4&#160;</span> And Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, the father of Beth-lehem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Ashur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_6">6&#160;</span> And Naarah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Naarah. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Helah <span class='add'>were</span>, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_8">8&#160;</span> And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Jabez was more honourable than his brethren: and his mother called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bare him with sorrow.
<span class="verse" id="R14_10">10&#160;</span> And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep <span class='add'>me</span> from evil, that it may not grieve me! And God granted him that which he requested.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir, which <span class='add'>was</span> the father of Eshton. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_12">12&#160;</span> And Eshton begat Beth-rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These <span class='add'>are</span> the men of Rechah.
<span class="verse" id="R14_13">13&#160;</span> And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, and Seraiah: and the sons of Othniel; Hathath.
<span class="verse" id="R14_14">14&#160;</span> And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the valley of Charashim; for they were craftsmen.
<span class="verse" id="R14_15">15&#160;</span> And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh; Iru, Elah, and Naam: and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz.
<span class="verse" id="R14_16">16&#160;</span> And the sons of Jehaleleel; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asareel. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_17">17&#160;</span> And the sons of Ezra <span class='add'>were</span>, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_18">18&#160;</span> And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered took.
<span class="verse" id="R14_19">19&#160;</span> And the sons of <span class='add'>his</span> wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
<span class="verse" id="R14_20">20&#160;</span> And the sons of Shimon <span class='add'>were</span>, Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi <span class='add'>were</span>, Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_21">21&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Shelah the son of Judah <span class='add'>were</span>, Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea, 
<span class="verse" id="R14_22">22&#160;</span> And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubi-lehem. And <span class='add'>these are</span> ancient things. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_23">23&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> the potters, and those that dwelt among plants and hedges: there they dwelt with the king for his work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_24">24&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Simeon <span class='add'>were</span>, Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, <span class='add'>and</span> Shaul:
<span class="verse" id="R14_25">25&#160;</span> Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_26">26&#160;</span> And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zacchur his son, Shimei his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_27">27&#160;</span> And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brethren had not many children, neither did all their family multiply, like to the children of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="R14_28">28&#160;</span> And they dwelt at Beer-sheba, and Moladah, and Hazar-shual, 
<span class="verse" id="R14_29">29&#160;</span> And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,
<span class="verse" id="R14_30">30&#160;</span> And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag, 
<span class="verse" id="R14_31">31&#160;</span> And at Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susim, and at Beth-birei, and at Shaaraim. These <span class='add'>were</span> their cities unto the reign of David.
<span class="verse" id="R14_32">32&#160;</span> And their villages <span class='add'>were</span>, Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities:
<span class="verse" id="R14_33">33&#160;</span> And all their villages that <span class='add'>were</span> round about the same cities, unto Baal. These <span class='add'>were</span> their habitations, and their genealogy.
<span class="verse" id="R14_34">34&#160;</span> And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah, 
<span class="verse" id="R14_35">35&#160;</span> And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel, 
<span class="verse" id="R14_36">36&#160;</span> And Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah, 
<span class="verse" id="R14_37">37&#160;</span> And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah; 
<span class="verse" id="R14_38">38&#160;</span> These mentioned by <span class='add'>their</span> names <span class='add'>were</span> princes in their families: and the house of their fathers increased greatly.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R14_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And they went to the entrance of Gedor, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_40">40&#160;</span> And they found fat pasture and good, and the land <span class='add'>was</span> wide, and quiet, and peaceable; for <span class='add'>they</span> of Ham had dwelt there of old. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_41">41&#160;</span> And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote their tents, and the habitations that were found there, and destroyed them utterly unto this day, and dwelt in their rooms: because <span class='add'>there was</span> pasture there for their flocks. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_42">42&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>some</span> of them, <span class='add'>even</span> of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi. 
<span class="verse" id="R14_43">43&#160;</span> And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, and dwelt there unto this day.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R15_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R15_1">1&#160;</span> Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (for he <span class='add'>was</span> the firstborn; but, forasmuch as he defiled his father’s bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_2">2&#160;</span> For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him <span class='add'>came</span> the chief ruler; but the birthright <span class='add'>was</span> Joseph’s:)
<span class="verse" id="R15_3">3&#160;</span> The sons, <span class='add'>I say</span>, of Reuben the firstborn of Israel <span class='add'>were</span>, Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_4">4&#160;</span> The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R15_5">5&#160;</span> Micah his son, Reaia his son, Baal his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R15_6">6&#160;</span> Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria carried away <span class='add'>captive:</span> he <span class='add'>was</span> prince of the Reubenites.
<span class="verse" id="R15_7">7&#160;</span> And his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned, <span class='add'>were</span> the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, 
<span class="verse" id="R15_8">8&#160;</span> And Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Baal-meon:
<span class="verse" id="R15_9">9&#160;</span> And eastward he inhabited unto the entering in of the wilderness from the river Euphrates: because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_10">10&#160;</span> And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, who fell by their hand: and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the east <span class='add'>land</span> of Gilead.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R15_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of Bashan unto Salchah: 
<span class="verse" id="R15_12">12&#160;</span> Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_13">13&#160;</span> And their brethren of the house of their fathers <span class='add'>were</span>, Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_14">14&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz; 
<span class="verse" id="R15_15">15&#160;</span> Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of the house of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_16">16&#160;</span> And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in her towns, and in all the suburbs of Sharon, upon their borders.
<span class="verse" id="R15_17">17&#160;</span> All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R15_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and half the tribe of Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with bow, and skilful in war, <span class='add'>were</span> four and forty thousand seven hundred and threescore, that went out to the war.
<span class="verse" id="R15_19">19&#160;</span> And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_20">20&#160;</span> And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were delivered into their hand, and all that <span class='add'>were</span> with them: for they cried to God in the battle, and he was intreated of them; because they put their trust in him. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_21">21&#160;</span> And they took away their cattle; of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of asses two thousand, and of men an hundred thousand.
<span class="verse" id="R15_22">22&#160;</span> For there fell down many slain, because the war <span class='add'>was</span> of God. And they dwelt in their steads until the captivity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R15_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the children of the half tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land: they increased from Bashan unto Baal-hermon and Senir, and unto mount Hermon. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_24">24&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>were</span> the heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, <span class='add'>and</span> heads of the house of their fathers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R15_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them. 
<span class="verse" id="R15_26">26&#160;</span> And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river Gozan, unto this day.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R16_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R16_1">1&#160;</span> The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
<span class="verse" id="R16_2">2&#160;</span> And the sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_3">3&#160;</span> And the children of Amram; Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. The sons also of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R16_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_5">5&#160;</span> And Abishua begat Bukki, and Bukki begat Uzzi, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_6">6&#160;</span> And Uzzi begat Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begat Meraioth, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_7">7&#160;</span> Meraioth begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_8">8&#160;</span> And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Ahimaaz, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_9">9&#160;</span> And Ahimaaz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Johanan, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_10">10&#160;</span> And Johanan begat Azariah, (he <span class='add'>it is</span> that executed the priest’s office in the temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem:)
<span class="verse" id="R16_11">11&#160;</span> And Azariah begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_12">12&#160;</span> And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Shallum,
<span class="verse" id="R16_13">13&#160;</span> And Shallum begat Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begat Azariah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_14">14&#160;</span> And Azariah begat Seraiah, and Seraiah begat Jehozadak, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_15">15&#160;</span> And Jehozadak went <span class='add'>into captivity</span>, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R16_16">16&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Levi; Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
<span class="verse" id="R16_17">17&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>be</span> the names of the sons of Gershom; Libni, and Shimei. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_18">18&#160;</span> And the sons of Kohath <span class='add'>were</span>, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_19">19&#160;</span> The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. And these <span class='add'>are</span> the families of the Levites according to their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_20">20&#160;</span> Of Gershom; Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_21">21&#160;</span> Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son.
<span class="verse" id="R16_22">22&#160;</span> The sons of Kohath; Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,
<span class="verse" id="R16_23">23&#160;</span> Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_24">24&#160;</span> Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_25">25&#160;</span> And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah; Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,
<span class="verse" id="R16_27">27&#160;</span> Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_28">28&#160;</span> And the sons of Samuel; the firstborn Vashni, and Abiah.
<span class="verse" id="R16_29">29&#160;</span> The sons of Merari; Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_30">30&#160;</span> Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R16_31">31&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are they</span> whom David set over the service of song in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, after that the ark had rest. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_32">32&#160;</span> And they ministered before the dwelling place of the tabernacle of the congregation with singing, until Solomon had built the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Jerusalem: and <span class='add'>then</span> they waited on their office according to their order. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_33">33&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> they that waited with their children. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman a singer, the son of Joel, the son of Shemuel,
<span class="verse" id="R16_34">34&#160;</span> The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_35">35&#160;</span> The son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_36">36&#160;</span> The son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_37">37&#160;</span> The son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_38">38&#160;</span> The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_39">39&#160;</span> And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, <span class='add'>even</span> Asaph the son of Berachiah, the son of Shimea, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_40">40&#160;</span> The son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchiah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_41">41&#160;</span> The son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_42">42&#160;</span> The son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_43">43&#160;</span> The son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_44">44&#160;</span> And their brethren the sons of Merari <span class='add'>stood</span> on the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,
<span class="verse" id="R16_45">45&#160;</span> The son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_46">46&#160;</span> The son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shamer, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_47">47&#160;</span> The son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_48">48&#160;</span> Their brethren also the Levites <span class='add'>were</span> appointed unto all manner of service of the tabernacle of the house of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R16_49">49&#160;</span>¶ But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt offering, and on the altar of incense, <span class='add'>and were appointed</span> for all the work of the <span class='add'>place</span> most holy, and to make an atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_50">50&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_51">51&#160;</span> Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_52">52&#160;</span> Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_53">53&#160;</span> Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R16_54">54&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are</span> their dwelling places throughout their castles in their coasts, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites: for theirs was the lot. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_55">55&#160;</span> And they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs thereof round about it. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_56">56&#160;</span> But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_57">57&#160;</span> And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah, <span class='add'>namely</span>, Hebron, <span class='add'>the city</span> of refuge, and Libnah with her suburbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa, with their suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_58">58&#160;</span> And Hilen with her suburbs, Debir with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="R16_59">59&#160;</span> And Ashan with her suburbs, and Beth-shemesh with her suburbs:
<span class="verse" id="R16_60">60&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Benjamin; Geba with her suburbs, and Alemeth with her suburbs, and Anathoth with her suburbs. All their cities throughout their families <span class='add'>were</span> thirteen cities.
<span class="verse" id="R16_61">61&#160;</span> And unto the sons of Kohath, <span class='add'>which were</span> left of the family of that tribe, <span class='add'>were cities given</span> out of the half tribe, <span class='add'>namely, out of</span> the half <span class='add'>tribe</span> of Manasseh, by lot, ten cities. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_62">62&#160;</span> And to the sons of Gershom throughout their families out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_63">63&#160;</span> Unto the sons of Merari <span class='add'>were given</span> by lot, throughout their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_64">64&#160;</span> And the children of Israel gave to the Levites <span class='add'>these</span> cities with their suburbs. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_65">65&#160;</span> And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities, which are called by <span class='add'>their</span> names. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_66">66&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>the residue</span> of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_67">67&#160;</span> And they gave unto them, <span class='add'>of</span> the cities of refuge, Shechem in mount Ephraim with her suburbs; <span class='add'>they gave</span> also Gezer with her suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_68">68&#160;</span> And Jokmeam with her suburbs, and Beth-horon with her suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_69">69&#160;</span> And Aijalon with her suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with her suburbs: 
<span class="verse" id="R16_70">70&#160;</span> And out of the half tribe of Manasseh; Aner with her suburbs, and Bileam with her suburbs, for the family of the remnant of the sons of Kohath. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_71">71&#160;</span> Unto the sons of Gershom <span class='add'>were given</span> out of the family of the half tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, and Ashtaroth with her suburbs: 
<span class="verse" id="R16_72">72&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Issachar; Kedesh with her suburbs, Daberath with her suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_73">73&#160;</span> And Ramoth with her suburbs, and Anem with her suburbs: 
<span class="verse" id="R16_74">74&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Asher; Mashal with her suburbs, and Abdon with her suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_75">75&#160;</span> And Hukok with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs: 
<span class="verse" id="R16_76">76&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Naphtali; Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, and Hammon with her suburbs, and Kirjathaim with her suburbs. 
<span class="verse" id="R16_77">77&#160;</span> Unto the rest of the children of Merari <span class='add'>were given</span> out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmon with her suburbs, Tabor with her suburbs: 
<span class="verse" id="R16_78">78&#160;</span> And on the other side Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of Jordan, <span class='add'>were given them</span> out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with her suburbs, and Jahzah with her suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_79">79&#160;</span> Kedemoth also with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs: 
<span class="verse" id="R16_80">80&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Gad; Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, and Mahanaim with her suburbs, 
<span class="verse" id="R16_81">81&#160;</span> And Heshbon with her suburbs, and Jazer with her suburbs.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R17_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_1">1&#160;</span> Now the sons of Issachar <span class='add'>were</span>, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_2">2&#160;</span> And the sons of Tola; Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father’s house, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, of Tola: <span class='add'>they were</span> valiant men of might in their generations; whose number <span class='add'>was</span> in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_3">3&#160;</span> And the sons of Uzzi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: all of them chief men. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_4">4&#160;</span> And with them, by their generations, after the house of their fathers, <span class='add'>were</span> bands of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand <span class='add'>men:</span> for they had many wives and sons. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_5">5&#160;</span> And their brethren among all the families of Issachar <span class='add'>were</span> valiant men of might, reckoned in all by their genealogies fourscore and seven thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_6">6&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>The sons</span> of Benjamin; Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of the house of <span class='add'>their</span> fathers, mighty men of valour; and were reckoned by their genealogies twenty and two thousand and thirty and four. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_8">8&#160;</span> And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. All these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Becher. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_9">9&#160;</span> And the number of them, after their genealogy by their generations, heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour, <span class='add'>was</span> twenty thousand and two hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_10">10&#160;</span> The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and Ahishahar. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_11">11&#160;</span> All these the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their fathers, mighty men of valour, <span class='add'>were</span> seventeen thousand and two hundred <span class='add'>soldiers</span>, fit to go out for war <span class='add'>and</span> battle. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_12">12&#160;</span> Shuppim also, and Huppim, the children of Ir, <span class='add'>and</span> Hushim, the sons of Aher.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_13">13&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_14">14&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Manasseh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (<span class='add'>but</span> his concubine the Aramitess bare Machir the father of Gilead: 
<span class="verse" id="R17_15">15&#160;</span> And Machir took to wife <span class='add'>the sister</span> of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Maachah;) and the name of the second <span class='add'>was</span> Zelophehad: and Zelophehad had daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_16">16&#160;</span> And Maachah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother <span class='add'>was</span> Sheresh; and his sons <span class='add'>were</span> Ulam and Rakem. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_17">17&#160;</span> And the sons of Ulam; Bedan. These <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_18">18&#160;</span> And his sister Hammoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_19">19&#160;</span> And the sons of Shemida were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the sons of Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath <span class='add'>that were</span> born in <span class='add'>that</span> land slew, because they came down to take away their cattle. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_22">22&#160;</span> And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And when he went in to his wife, she conceived, and bare a son, and he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_24">24&#160;</span>(And his daughter <span class='add'>was</span> Sherah, who built Beth-horon the nether, and the upper, and Uzzen-sherah.) 
<span class="verse" id="R17_25">25&#160;</span> And Rephah <span class='add'>was</span> his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R17_26">26&#160;</span> Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son, 
<span class="verse" id="R17_27">27&#160;</span> Non his son, Jehoshua his son.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And their possessions and habitations <span class='add'>were</span>, Beth-el and the towns thereof, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Gaza and the towns thereof:
<span class="verse" id="R17_29">29&#160;</span> And by the borders of the children of Manasseh, Beth-shean and her towns, Taanach and her towns, Megiddo and her towns, Dor and her towns. In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R17_30">30&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and Serah their sister. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_31">31&#160;</span> And the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel, who <span class='add'>is</span> the father of Birzavith. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_32">32&#160;</span> And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_33">33&#160;</span> And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These <span class='add'>are</span> the children of Japhlet. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_34">34&#160;</span> And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_35">35&#160;</span> And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_36">36&#160;</span> The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah, 
<span class="verse" id="R17_37">37&#160;</span> Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_38">38&#160;</span> And the sons of Jether; Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_39">39&#160;</span> And the sons of Ulla; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia. 
<span class="verse" id="R17_40">40&#160;</span>All these <span class='add'>were</span> the children of Asher, heads of <span class='add'>their</span> father’s house, choice <span class='add'>and</span> mighty men of valour, chief of the princes. And the number throughout the genealogy of them that were apt to the war <span class='add'>and</span> to battle <span class='add'>was</span> twenty and six thousand men.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R18_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R18_1">1&#160;</span> Now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_2">2&#160;</span> Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_3">3&#160;</span> And the sons of Bela were, Addar, and Gera, and Abihud,
<span class="verse" id="R18_4">4&#160;</span> And Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_5">5&#160;</span> And Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.
<span class="verse" id="R18_6">6&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Ehud: these are the heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Geba, and they removed them to Manahath: 
<span class="verse" id="R18_7">7&#160;</span> And Naaman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed them, and begat Uzza, and Ahihud. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_8">8&#160;</span> And Shaharaim begat <span class='add'>children</span> in the country of Moab, after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara <span class='add'>were</span> his wives. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_9">9&#160;</span> And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_10">10&#160;</span> And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These <span class='add'>were</span> his sons, heads of the fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_11">11&#160;</span> And of Hushim he begat Abitub, and Elpaal. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_12">12&#160;</span> The sons of Elpaal; Eber, and Misham, and Shamed, who built Ono, and Lod, with the towns thereof: 
<span class="verse" id="R18_13">13&#160;</span> Beriah also, and Shema, who <span class='add'>were</span> heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants of Gath: 
<span class="verse" id="R18_14">14&#160;</span> And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_15">15&#160;</span> And Zebadiah, and Arad, and Ader, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_16">16&#160;</span> And Michael, and Ispah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah; 
<span class="verse" id="R18_17">17&#160;</span> And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hezeki, and Heber, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_18">18&#160;</span> Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal; 
<span class="verse" id="R18_19">19&#160;</span> And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_20">20&#160;</span> And Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_21">21&#160;</span> And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi;
<span class="verse" id="R18_22">22&#160;</span> And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_23">23&#160;</span> And Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_24">24&#160;</span> And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_25">25&#160;</span> And Iphedeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak; 
<span class="verse" id="R18_26">26&#160;</span> And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_27">27&#160;</span> And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_28">28&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> heads of the fathers, by their generations, chief <span class='add'>men</span>. These dwelt in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_29">29&#160;</span> And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon; whose wife’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Maachah:
<span class="verse" id="R18_30">30&#160;</span> And his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab, 
<span class="verse" id="R18_31">31&#160;</span> And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher.
<span class="verse" id="R18_32">32&#160;</span> And Mikloth begat Shimeah. And these also dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, over against them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R18_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal.
<span class="verse" id="R18_34">34&#160;</span> And the son of Jonathan <span class='add'>was</span> Merib-baal; and Merib-baal begat Micah.
<span class="verse" id="R18_35">35&#160;</span> And the sons of Micah <span class='add'>were</span>, Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.
<span class="verse" id="R18_36">36&#160;</span> And Ahaz begat Jehoadah; and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza,
<span class="verse" id="R18_37">37&#160;</span> And Moza begat Binea: Rapha <span class='add'>was</span> his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son:
<span class="verse" id="R18_38">38&#160;</span> And Azel had six sons, whose names <span class='add'>are</span> these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Azel. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_39">39&#160;</span> And the sons of Eshek his brother <span class='add'>were</span>, Ulam his firstborn, Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third. 
<span class="verse" id="R18_40">40&#160;</span> And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers, and had many sons, and sons’ sons, an hundred and fifty. All these <span class='add'>are</span> of the sons of Benjamin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R19_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R19_1">1&#160;</span> So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they <span class='add'>were</span> written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah, <span class='add'>who</span> were carried away to Babylon for their transgression. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R19_2">2&#160;</span>¶ Now the first inhabitants that <span class='add'>dwelt</span> in their possessions in their cities <span class='add'>were</span>, the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and the Nethinims. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_3">3&#160;</span> And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasseh; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_4">4&#160;</span> Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Pharez the son of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_5">5&#160;</span> And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_6">6&#160;</span> And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_7">7&#160;</span> And of the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hasenuah, 
<span class="verse" id="R19_8">8&#160;</span> And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_9">9&#160;</span> And their brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty and six. All these men <span class='add'>were</span> chief of the fathers in the house of their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R19_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And of the priests; Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin, 
<span class="verse" id="R19_11">11&#160;</span> And Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God;
<span class="verse" id="R19_12">12&#160;</span> And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_13">13&#160;</span> And their brethren, heads of the house of their fathers, a thousand and seven hundred and threescore; very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R19_14">14&#160;</span> And of the Levites; Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_15">15&#160;</span> And Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_16">16&#160;</span> And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_17">17&#160;</span> And the porters <span class='add'>were</span>, Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brethren: Shallum <span class='add'>was</span> the chief; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_18">18&#160;</span>Who hitherto <span class='add'>waited</span> in the king’s gate eastward: they <span class='add'>were</span> porters in the companies of the children of Levi. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_19">19&#160;</span> And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, <span class='add'>were</span> over the work of the service, keepers of the gates of the tabernacle: and their fathers, <span class='add'>being</span> over the host of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>were</span> keepers of the entry.
<span class="verse" id="R19_20">20&#160;</span> And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time past, <span class='add'>and</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah <span class='add'>was</span> porter of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_22">22&#160;</span>All these <span class='add'>which were</span> chosen to be porters in the gates <span class='add'>were</span> two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by their genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer did ordain in their set office.
<span class="verse" id="R19_23">23&#160;</span> So they and their children <span class='add'>had</span> the oversight of the gates of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>namely</span>, the house of the tabernacle, by wards. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_24">24&#160;</span> In four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and south. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_25">25&#160;</span> And their brethren, <span class='add'>which were</span> in their villages, <span class='add'>were</span> to come after seven days from time to time with them. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_26">26&#160;</span> For these Levites, the four chief porters, were in <span class='add'>their</span> set office, and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house of God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R19_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge <span class='add'>was</span> upon them, and the opening thereof every morning <span class='add'>pertained</span> to them. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_28">28&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>certain</span> of them had the charge of the ministering vessels, that they should bring them in and out by tale.
<span class="verse" id="R19_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Some</span> of them also <span class='add'>were</span> appointed to oversee the vessels, and all the instruments of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.
<span class="verse" id="R19_30">30&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>some</span> of the sons of the priests made the ointment of the spices. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_31">31&#160;</span> And Mattithiah, <span class='add'>one</span> of the Levites, who <span class='add'>was</span> the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the set office over the things that were made in the pans.
<span class="verse" id="R19_32">32&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>other</span> of their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, <span class='add'>were</span> over the shewbread, to prepare <span class='add'>it</span> every sabbath.
<span class="verse" id="R19_33">33&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites, <span class='add'>who remaining</span> in the chambers <span class='add'>were</span> free: for they were employed in <span class='add'>that</span> work day and night.
<span class="verse" id="R19_34">34&#160;</span> These chief fathers of the Levites <span class='add'>were</span> chief throughout their generations; these dwelt at Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R19_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jehiel, whose wife’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Maachah: 
<span class="verse" id="R19_36">36&#160;</span> And his firstborn son Abdon, then Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab, 
<span class="verse" id="R19_37">37&#160;</span> And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_38">38&#160;</span> And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brethren at Jerusalem, over against their brethren. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_39">39&#160;</span> And Ner begat Kish; and Kish begat Saul; and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_40">40&#160;</span> And the son of Jonathan <span class='add'>was</span> Merib-baal: and Merib-baal begat Micah. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_41">41&#160;</span> And the sons of Micah <span class='add'>were</span>, Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, <span class='add'>and Ahaz</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_42">42&#160;</span> And Ahaz begat Jarah; and Jarah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza; 
<span class="verse" id="R19_43">43&#160;</span> And Moza begat Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R19_44">44&#160;</span> And Azel had six sons, whose names <span class='add'>are</span> these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Azel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R110_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R110_1">1&#160;</span> Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
<span class="verse" id="R110_2">2&#160;</span> And the Philistines followed hard after Saul, and after his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.
<span class="verse" id="R110_3">3&#160;</span> And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him, and he was wounded of the archers.
<span class="verse" id="R110_4">4&#160;</span> Then said Saul to his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. So Saul took a sword, and fell upon it.
<span class="verse" id="R110_5">5&#160;</span> And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise on the sword, and died. 
<span class="verse" id="R110_6">6&#160;</span> So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house died together. 
<span class="verse" id="R110_7">7&#160;</span> And when all the men of Israel that <span class='add'>were</span> in the valley saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, then they forsook their cities, and fled: and the Philistines came and dwelt in them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R110_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa. 
<span class="verse" id="R110_9">9&#160;</span> And when they had stripped him, they took his head, and his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to carry tidings unto their idols, and to the people. 
<span class="verse" id="R110_10">10&#160;</span> And they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the temple of Dagon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R110_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul, 
<span class="verse" id="R110_12">12&#160;</span> They arose, all the valiant men, and took away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R110_13">13&#160;</span>¶ So Saul died for his transgression which he committed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> against the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he kept not, and also for asking <span class='add'>counsel</span> of <span class='add'>one that had</span> a familiar spirit, to enquire <span class='add'>of it;</span>
<span class="verse" id="R110_14">14&#160;</span> And enquired not of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: therefore he slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jesse.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R111_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R111_1">1&#160;</span> Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying, Behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> thy bone and thy flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_2">2&#160;</span> And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou <span class='add'>wast</span> he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God said unto thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my people Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R111_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by Samuel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R111_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which <span class='add'>is</span> Jebus; where the Jebusites <span class='add'>were</span>, the inhabitants of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_5">5&#160;</span> And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come hither. Nevertheless David took the castle of Zion, which <span class='add'>is</span> the city of David. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_6">6&#160;</span> And David said, Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief.
<span class="verse" id="R111_7">7&#160;</span> And David dwelt in the castle; therefore they called it the city of David.
<span class="verse" id="R111_8">8&#160;</span> And he built the city round about, even from Millo round about: and Joab repaired the rest of the city.
<span class="verse" id="R111_9">9&#160;</span> So David waxed greater and greater: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>was</span> with him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R111_10">10&#160;</span>¶ These also <span class='add'>are</span> the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, <span class='add'>and</span> with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> concerning Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R111_11">11&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the number of the mighty men whom David had; Jashobeam, an Hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his spear against three hundred slain <span class='add'>by him</span> at one time.
<span class="verse" id="R111_12">12&#160;</span> And after him <span class='add'>was</span> Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who <span class='add'>was one</span> of the three mighties. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_13">13&#160;</span> He was with David at Pas-dammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a parcel of ground full of barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="R111_14">14&#160;</span> And they set themselves in the midst of <span class='add'>that</span> parcel, and delivered it, and slew the Philistines; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saved <span class='add'>them</span> by a great deliverance.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R111_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Now three of the thirty captains went down to the rock to David, into the cave of Adullam; and the host of the Philistines encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
<span class="verse" id="R111_16">16&#160;</span> And David <span class='add'>was</span> then in the hold, and the Philistines’ garrison <span class='add'>was</span> then at Beth-lehem. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_17">17&#160;</span> And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well of Beth-lehem, that <span class='add'>is</span> at the gate! 
<span class="verse" id="R111_18">18&#160;</span> And the three brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Beth-lehem, that <span class='add'>was</span> by the gate, and took <span class='add'>it</span>, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> to David: but David would not drink <span class='add'>of</span> it, but poured it out to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_19">19&#160;</span> And said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing: shall I drink the blood of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for with <span class='add'>the jeopardy of</span> their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did these three mightiest.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R111_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three: for lifting up his spear against three hundred, he slew <span class='add'>them</span>, and had a name among the three. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_21">21&#160;</span> Of the three, he was more honourable than the two; for he was their captain: howbeit he attained not to the <span class='add'>first</span> three. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_22">22&#160;</span> Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of Moab: also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day.
<span class="verse" id="R111_23">23&#160;</span> And he slew an Egyptian, a man of <span class='add'>great</span> stature, five cubits high; and in the Egyptian’s hand <span class='add'>was</span> a spear like a weaver’s beam; and he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and slew him with his own spear.
<span class="verse" id="R111_24">24&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>things</span> did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among the three mighties. 
<span class="verse" id="R111_25">25&#160;</span> Behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but attained not to the <span class='add'>first</span> three: and David set him over his guard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R111_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Also the valiant men of the armies <span class='add'>were</span>, Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Beth-lehem, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_27">27&#160;</span> Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
<span class="verse" id="R111_28">28&#160;</span> Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abi-ezer the Antothite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_29">29&#160;</span> Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
<span class="verse" id="R111_30">30&#160;</span> Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,
<span class="verse" id="R111_31">31&#160;</span> Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, <span class='add'>that pertained</span> to the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_32">32&#160;</span> Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
<span class="verse" id="R111_33">33&#160;</span> Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_34">34&#160;</span> The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite,
<span class="verse" id="R111_35">35&#160;</span> Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,
<span class="verse" id="R111_36">36&#160;</span> Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_37">37&#160;</span> Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
<span class="verse" id="R111_38">38&#160;</span> Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Haggeri,
<span class="verse" id="R111_39">39&#160;</span> Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_40">40&#160;</span> Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_41">41&#160;</span> Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_42">42&#160;</span> Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty with him, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_43">43&#160;</span> Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_44">44&#160;</span> Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_45">45&#160;</span> Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,
<span class="verse" id="R111_46">46&#160;</span> Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite, 
<span class="verse" id="R111_47">47&#160;</span> Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R112_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R112_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish: and they <span class='add'>were</span> among the mighty men, helpers of the war.
<span class="verse" id="R112_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They were</span> armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in <span class='add'>hurling</span> stones and <span class='add'>shooting</span> arrows out of a bow, <span class='add'>even</span> of Saul’s brethren of Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_3">3&#160;</span> The chief <span class='add'>was</span> Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite,
<span class="verse" id="R112_4">4&#160;</span> And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_5">5&#160;</span> Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_6">6&#160;</span> Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korhites, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_7">7&#160;</span> And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_8">8&#160;</span> And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into the hold to the wilderness men of might, <span class='add'>and</span> men of war <span class='add'>fit</span> for the battle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces <span class='add'>were like</span> the faces of lions, and <span class='add'>were</span> as swift as the roes upon the mountains;
<span class="verse" id="R112_9">9&#160;</span> Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_10">10&#160;</span> Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_11">11&#160;</span> Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_12">12&#160;</span> Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, 
<span class="verse" id="R112_13">13&#160;</span> Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the eleventh. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_14">14&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> of the sons of Gad, captains of the host: one of the least <span class='add'>was</span> over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.
<span class="verse" id="R112_15">15&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it had overflown all his banks; and they put to flight all <span class='add'>them</span> of the valleys, <span class='add'>both</span> toward the east, and toward the west.
<span class="verse" id="R112_16">16&#160;</span> And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the hold unto David. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_17">17&#160;</span> And David went out to meet them, and answered and said unto them, If ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be knit unto you: but if <span class='add'>ye be come</span> to betray me to mine enemies, seeing <span class='add'>there is</span> no wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers look <span class='add'>thereon</span>, and rebuke <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R112_18">18&#160;</span> Then the spirit came upon Amasai, <span class='add'>who was</span> chief of the captains, <span class='add'>and he said</span>, Thine <span class='add'>are we</span>, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse: peace, peace <span class='add'>be</span> unto thee, and peace <span class='add'>be</span> to thine helpers; for thy God helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them captains of the band.
<span class="verse" id="R112_19">19&#160;</span> And there fell <span class='add'>some</span> of Manasseh to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle: but they helped them not: for the lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, He will fall to his master Saul to <span class='add'>the jeopardy of</span> our heads.
<span class="verse" id="R112_20">20&#160;</span> As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zilthai, captains of the thousands that <span class='add'>were</span> of Manasseh. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_21">21&#160;</span> And they helped David against the band <span class='add'>of the rovers:</span> for they <span class='add'>were</span> all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.
<span class="verse" id="R112_22">22&#160;</span>For at <span class='add'>that</span> time day by day there came to David to help him, until <span class='add'>it was</span> a great host, like the host of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R112_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the numbers of the bands <span class='add'>that were</span> ready armed to the war, <span class='add'>and</span> came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R112_24">24&#160;</span> The children of Judah that bare shield and spear <span class='add'>were</span> six thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war.
<span class="verse" id="R112_25">25&#160;</span> Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for the war, seven thousand and one hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_26">26&#160;</span> Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_27">27&#160;</span> And Jehoiada <span class='add'>was</span> the leader of the Aaronites, and with him <span class='add'>were</span> three thousand and seven hundred; 
<span class="verse" id="R112_28">28&#160;</span> And Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, and of his father’s house twenty and two captains. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_29">29&#160;</span> And of the children of Benjamin, the kindred of Saul, three thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of the house of Saul.
<span class="verse" id="R112_30">30&#160;</span> And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="R112_31">31&#160;</span> And of the half tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, which were expressed by name, to come and make David king. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_32">32&#160;</span> And of the children of Issachar, <span class='add'>which were men</span> that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads of them <span class='add'>were</span> two hundred; and all their brethren <span class='add'>were</span> at their commandment. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_33">33&#160;</span> Of Zebulun, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, with all instruments of war, fifty thousand, which could keep rank: <span class='add'>they were</span> not of double heart.
<span class="verse" id="R112_34">34&#160;</span> And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield and spear thirty and seven thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_35">35&#160;</span> And of the Danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and six hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_36">36&#160;</span> And of Asher, such as went forth to battle, expert in war, forty thousand.
<span class="verse" id="R112_37">37&#160;</span> And on the other side of Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of war for the battle, an hundred and twenty thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_38">38&#160;</span> All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel: and all the rest also of Israel <span class='add'>were</span> of one heart to make David king. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_39">39&#160;</span> And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking: for their brethren had prepared for them. 
<span class="verse" id="R112_40">40&#160;</span> Moreover they that were nigh them, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, <span class='add'>and</span> meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly: for <span class='add'>there was</span> joy in Israel.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R113_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R113_1">1&#160;</span> And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds, <span class='add'>and</span> with every leader. 
<span class="verse" id="R113_2">2&#160;</span> And David said unto all the congregation of Israel, If <span class='add'>it seem</span> good unto you, and <span class='add'>that it be</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, let us send abroad unto our brethren every where, <span class='add'>that are</span> left in all the land of Israel, and with them <span class='add'>also</span> to the priests and Levites <span class='add'>which are</span> in their cities <span class='add'>and</span> suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us:
<span class="verse" id="R113_3">3&#160;</span> And let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we enquired not at it in the days of Saul.
<span class="verse" id="R113_4">4&#160;</span> And all the congregation said that they would do so: for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people. 
<span class="verse" id="R113_5">5&#160;</span> So David gathered all Israel together, from Shihor of Egypt even unto the entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of God from Kirjath-jearim. 
<span class="verse" id="R113_6">6&#160;</span> And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, <span class='add'>that is</span>, to Kirjath-jearim, which <span class='add'>belonged</span> to Judah, to bring up thence the ark of God the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that dwelleth <span class='add'>between</span> the cherubims, whose name is called <span class='add'>on it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R113_7">7&#160;</span> And they carried the ark of God in a new cart out of the house of Abinadab: and Uzza and Ahio drave the cart.
<span class="verse" id="R113_8">8&#160;</span> And David and all Israel played before God with all <span class='add'>their</span> might, and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R113_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And when they came unto the threshingfloor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled.
<span class="verse" id="R113_10">10&#160;</span> And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against Uzza, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God. 
<span class="verse" id="R113_11">11&#160;</span> And David was displeased, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made a breach upon Uzza: wherefore that place is called Perez-uzza to this day.
<span class="verse" id="R113_12">12&#160;</span> And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God <span class='add'>home</span> to me? 
<span class="verse" id="R113_13">13&#160;</span> So David brought not the ark <span class='add'>home</span> to himself to the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
<span class="verse" id="R113_14">14&#160;</span> And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that he had.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R114_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R114_1">1&#160;</span> Now Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and timber of cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_2">2&#160;</span> And David perceived that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had confirmed him king over Israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R114_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And David took more wives at Jerusalem: and David begat more sons and daughters.
<span class="verse" id="R114_4">4&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of <span class='add'>his</span> children which he had in Jerusalem; Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon, 
<span class="verse" id="R114_5">5&#160;</span> And Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet, 
<span class="verse" id="R114_6">6&#160;</span> And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 
<span class="verse" id="R114_7">7&#160;</span> And Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphalet.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R114_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, and went out against them. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_9">9&#160;</span> And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_10">10&#160;</span> And David enquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? and wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Go up; for I will deliver them into thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_11">11&#160;</span> So they came up to Baal-perazim; and David smote them there. Then David said, God hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the breaking forth of waters: therefore they called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
<span class="verse" id="R114_12">12&#160;</span> And when they had left their gods there, David gave a commandment, and they were burned with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_13">13&#160;</span> And the Philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the valley. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore David enquired again of God; and God said unto him, Go not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over against the mulberry trees. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_15">15&#160;</span> And it shall be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the tops of the mulberry trees, <span class='add'>that</span> then thou shalt go out to battle: for God is gone forth before thee to smite the host of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="R114_16">16&#160;</span> David therefore did as God commanded him: and they smote the host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gazer.
<span class="verse" id="R114_17">17&#160;</span> And the fame of David went out into all lands; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought the fear of him upon all nations.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R115_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R115_1">1&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>David</span> made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_2">2&#160;</span> Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever.
<span class="verse" id="R115_3">3&#160;</span> And David gathered all Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto his place, which he had prepared for it. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_4">4&#160;</span> And David assembled the children of Aaron, and the Levites: 
<span class="verse" id="R115_5">5&#160;</span> Of the sons of Kohath; Uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred and twenty:
<span class="verse" id="R115_6">6&#160;</span> Of the sons of Merari; Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred and twenty: 
<span class="verse" id="R115_7">7&#160;</span> Of the sons of Gershom; Joel the chief, and his brethren an hundred and thirty: 
<span class="verse" id="R115_8">8&#160;</span> Of the sons of Elizaphan; Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred: 
<span class="verse" id="R115_9">9&#160;</span> Of the sons of Hebron; Eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore: 
<span class="verse" id="R115_10">10&#160;</span> Of the sons of Uzziel; Amminadab the chief, and his brethren an hundred and twelve. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_11">11&#160;</span> And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab, 
<span class="verse" id="R115_12">12&#160;</span> And said unto them, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> the chief of the fathers of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, <span class='add'>both</span> ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel unto <span class='add'>the place that</span> I have prepared for it. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_13">13&#160;</span>For because ye <span class='add'>did it</span> not at the first, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_14">14&#160;</span> So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_15">15&#160;</span> And the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_16">16&#160;</span> And David spake to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren <span class='add'>to be</span> the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_17">17&#160;</span> So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; 
<span class="verse" id="R115_18">18&#160;</span> And with them their brethren of the second <span class='add'>degree</span>, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the porters. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_19">19&#160;</span> So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, <span class='add'>were appointed</span> to sound with cymbals of brass; 
<span class="verse" id="R115_20">20&#160;</span> And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth; 
<span class="verse" id="R115_21">21&#160;</span> And Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith to excel.
<span class="verse" id="R115_22">22&#160;</span> And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, <span class='add'>was</span> for song: he instructed about the song, because he <span class='add'>was</span> skilful.
<span class="verse" id="R115_23">23&#160;</span> And Berechiah and Elkanah <span class='add'>were</span> doorkeepers for the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_24">24&#160;</span> And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the trumpets before the ark of God: and Obed-edom and Jehiah <span class='add'>were</span> doorkeepers for the ark. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R115_25">25&#160;</span>¶ So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> out of the house of Obed-edom with joy. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_26">26&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bare the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that they offered seven bullocks and seven rams. 
<span class="verse" id="R115_27">27&#160;</span> And David <span class='add'>was</span> clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the song with the singers: David also <span class='add'>had</span> upon him an ephod of linen.
<span class="verse" id="R115_28">28&#160;</span> Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R115_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, <span class='add'>as</span> the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looking out at a window saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in her heart.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R116_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R116_1">1&#160;</span> So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it: and they offered burnt sacrifices and peace offerings before God. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_2">2&#160;</span> And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offerings and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_3">3&#160;</span> And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a flagon <span class='add'>of wine</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R116_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And he appointed <span class='add'>certain</span> of the Levites to minister before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to record, and to thank and praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="R116_5">5&#160;</span> Asaph the chief, and next to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed-edom: and Jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but Asaph made a sound with cymbals;
<span class="verse" id="R116_6">6&#160;</span> Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually before the ark of the covenant of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R116_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Then on that day David delivered first <span class='add'>this psalm</span> to thank the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> into the hand of Asaph and his brethren. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_8">8&#160;</span> Give thanks unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, call upon his name, make known his deeds among the people. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_9">9&#160;</span> Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous works. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_10">10&#160;</span> Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_11">11&#160;</span> Seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and his strength, seek his face continually. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_12">12&#160;</span> Remember his marvellous works that he hath done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth; 
<span class="verse" id="R116_13">13&#160;</span> O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_14">14&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God; his judgments <span class='add'>are</span> in all the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_15">15&#160;</span> Be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word <span class='add'>which</span> he commanded to a thousand generations; 
<span class="verse" id="R116_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even of the covenant</span> which he made with Abraham, and of his oath unto Isaac; 
<span class="verse" id="R116_17">17&#160;</span> And hath confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, <span class='add'>and</span> to Israel <span class='add'>for</span> an everlasting covenant, 
<span class="verse" id="R116_18">18&#160;</span> Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance;
<span class="verse" id="R116_19">19&#160;</span> When ye were but few, even a few, and strangers in it.
<span class="verse" id="R116_20">20&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>when</span> they went from nation to nation, and from <span class='add'>one</span> kingdom to another people; 
<span class="verse" id="R116_21">21&#160;</span> He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes, 
<span class="verse" id="R116_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Saying</span>, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_23">23&#160;</span> Sing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all the earth; shew forth from day to day his salvation. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_24">24&#160;</span> Declare his glory among the heathen; his marvellous works among all nations. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_25">25&#160;</span> For great <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and greatly to be praised: he also <span class='add'>is</span> to be feared above all gods. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_26">26&#160;</span> For all the gods of the people <span class='add'>are</span> idols: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made the heavens. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_27">27&#160;</span> Glory and honour <span class='add'>are</span> in his presence; strength and gladness <span class='add'>are</span> in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_28">28&#160;</span> Give unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> glory and strength. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_29">29&#160;</span> Give unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the glory <span class='add'>due</span> unto his name: bring an offering, and come before him: worship the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the beauty of holiness. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_30">30&#160;</span> Fear before him, all the earth: the world also shall be stable, that it be not moved. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_31">31&#160;</span> Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let <span class='add'>men</span> say among the nations, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> reigneth. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_32">32&#160;</span> Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof: let the fields rejoice, and all that <span class='add'>is</span> therein. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_33">33&#160;</span> Then shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because he cometh to judge the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_34">34&#160;</span> O give thanks unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for <span class='add'>he is</span> good; for his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_35">35&#160;</span> And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, <span class='add'>and</span> glory in thy praise. 
<span class="verse" id="R116_36">36&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel for ever and ever. And all the people said, Amen, and praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R116_37">37&#160;</span>¶ So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> Asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continually, as every day’s work required: 
<span class="verse" id="R116_38">38&#160;</span> And Obed-edom with their brethren, threescore and eight; Obed-edom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah <span class='add'>to be</span> porters: 
<span class="verse" id="R116_39">39&#160;</span> And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the high place that <span class='add'>was</span> at Gibeon, 
<span class="verse" id="R116_40">40&#160;</span> To offer burnt offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> upon the altar of the burnt offering continually morning and evening, and <span class='add'>to do</span> according to all that is written in the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he commanded Israel;
<span class="verse" id="R116_41">41&#160;</span> And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were expressed by name, to give thanks to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever; 
<span class="verse" id="R116_42">42&#160;</span> And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should make a sound, and with musical instruments of God. And the sons of Jeduthun <span class='add'>were</span> porters.
<span class="verse" id="R116_43">43&#160;</span> And all the people departed every man to his house: and David returned to bless his house.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R117_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R117_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, as David sat in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in an house of cedars, but the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>remaineth</span> under curtains. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_2">2&#160;</span> Then Nathan said unto David, Do all that <span class='add'>is</span> in thine heart; for God <span class='add'>is</span> with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R117_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R117_4">4&#160;</span> Go and tell David my servant, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Thou shalt not build me an house to dwell in: 
<span class="verse" id="R117_5">5&#160;</span> For I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from <span class='add'>one</span> tabernacle <span class='add'>to another</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R117_6">6&#160;</span> Wheresoever I have walked with all Israel, spake I a word to any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, saying, Why have ye not built me an house of cedars? 
<span class="verse" id="R117_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, I took thee from the sheepcote, <span class='add'>even</span> from following the sheep, that thou shouldest be ruler over my people Israel:
<span class="verse" id="R117_8">8&#160;</span> And I have been with thee whithersoever thou hast walked, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee, and have made thee a name like the name of the great men that <span class='add'>are</span> in the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_9">9&#160;</span> Also I will ordain a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, and they shall dwell in their place, and shall be moved no more; neither shall the children of wickedness waste them any more, as at the beginning, 
<span class="verse" id="R117_10">10&#160;</span> And since the time that I commanded judges <span class='add'>to be</span> over my people Israel. Moreover I will subdue all thine enemies. Furthermore I tell thee that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will build thee an house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R117_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, when thy days be expired that thou must go <span class='add'>to be</span> with thy fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_12">12&#160;</span> He shall build me an house, and I will stablish his throne for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_13">13&#160;</span> I will be his father, and he shall be my son: and I will not take my mercy away from him, as I took <span class='add'>it</span> from <span class='add'>him</span> that was before thee: 
<span class="verse" id="R117_14">14&#160;</span> But I will settle him in mine house and in my kingdom for ever: and his throne shall be established for evermore. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_15">15&#160;</span> According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R117_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And David the king came and sat before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, Who <span class='add'>am</span> I, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, and what <span class='add'>is</span> mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? 
<span class="verse" id="R117_17">17&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>yet</span> this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God; for thou hast <span class='add'>also</span> spoken of thy servant’s house for a great while to come, and hast regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_18">18&#160;</span> What can David <span class='add'>speak</span> more to thee for the honour of thy servant? for thou knowest thy servant. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_19">19&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, for thy servant’s sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all this greatness, in making known all <span class='add'>these</span> great things.
<span class="verse" id="R117_20">20&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>there is</span> none like thee, neither <span class='add'>is there any</span> God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_21">21&#160;</span> And what one nation in the earth <span class='add'>is</span> like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem <span class='add'>to be</span> his own people, to make thee a name of greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy people, whom thou hast redeemed out of Egypt? 
<span class="verse" id="R117_22">22&#160;</span> For thy people Israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, becamest their God. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore now, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, let the thing that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for ever, and do as thou hast said. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_24">24&#160;</span> Let it even be established, that thy name may be magnified for ever, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts <span class='add'>is</span> the God of Israel, <span class='add'>even</span> a God to Israel: and <span class='add'>let</span> the house of David thy servant <span class='add'>be</span> established before thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R117_25">25&#160;</span> For thou, O my God, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build him an house: therefore thy servant hath found <span class='add'>in his heart</span> to pray before thee.
<span class="verse" id="R117_26">26&#160;</span> And now, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou art God, and hast promised this goodness unto thy servant: 
<span class="verse" id="R117_27">27&#160;</span> Now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever: for thou blessest, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>it shall be</span> blessed for ever.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R118_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R118_1">1&#160;</span> Now after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and her towns out of the hand of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="R118_2">2&#160;</span> And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became David’s servants, <span class='add'>and</span> brought gifts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R118_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah unto Hamath, as he went to stablish his dominion by the river Euphrates.
<span class="verse" id="R118_4">4&#160;</span> And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: David also houghed all the chariot <span class='add'>horses</span>, but reserved of them an hundred chariots.
<span class="verse" id="R118_5">5&#160;</span> And when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men.
<span class="verse" id="R118_6">6&#160;</span> Then David put <span class='add'>garrisons</span> in Syria-damascus; and the Syrians became David’s servants, <span class='add'>and</span> brought gifts. Thus the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> preserved David whithersoever he went. 
<span class="verse" id="R118_7">7&#160;</span> And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R118_8">8&#160;</span> Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, brought David very much brass, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R118_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Now when Tou king of Hamath heard how David had smitten all the host of Hadarezer king of Zobah;
<span class="verse" id="R118_10">10&#160;</span> He sent Hadoram his son to king David, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he had fought against Hadarezer, and smitten him; (for Hadarezer had war with Tou;) and <span class='add'>with him</span> all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R118_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Them also king David dedicated unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with the silver and the gold that he brought from all <span class='add'>these</span> nations; from Edom, and from Moab, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek. 
<span class="verse" id="R118_12">12&#160;</span> Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of the Edomites in the valley of salt eighteen thousand.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R118_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And he put garrisons in Edom; and all the Edomites became David’s servants. Thus the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> preserved David whithersoever he went. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R118_14">14&#160;</span>¶ So David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and justice among all his people. 
<span class="verse" id="R118_15">15&#160;</span> And Joab the son of Zeruiah <span class='add'>was</span> over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, recorder.
<span class="verse" id="R118_16">16&#160;</span> And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, <span class='add'>were</span> the priests; and Shavsha was scribe;
<span class="verse" id="R118_17">17&#160;</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada <span class='add'>was</span> over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David <span class='add'>were</span> chief about the king.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R119_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R119_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_2">2&#160;</span> And David said, I will shew kindness unto Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father shewed kindness to me. And David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. So the servants of David came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_3">3&#160;</span> But the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thee? are not his servants come unto thee for to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land?
<span class="verse" id="R119_4">4&#160;</span> Wherefore Hanun took David’s servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the midst hard by their buttocks, and sent them away. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_5">5&#160;</span> Then there went <span class='add'>certain</span>, and told David how the men were served. And he sent to meet them: for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and <span class='add'>then</span> return. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R119_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And when the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syria-maachah, and out of Zobah.
<span class="verse" id="R119_7">7&#160;</span> So they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of Maachah and his people; who came and pitched before Medeba. And the children of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and came to battle. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_8">8&#160;</span> And when David heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, he sent Joab, and all the host of the mighty men. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_9">9&#160;</span> And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array before the gate of the city: and the kings that were come <span class='add'>were</span> by themselves in the field. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_10">10&#160;</span> Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him before and behind, he chose out of all the choice of Israel, and put <span class='add'>them</span> in array against the Syrians.
<span class="verse" id="R119_11">11&#160;</span> And the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of Abishai his brother, and they set <span class='add'>themselves</span> in array against the children of Ammon.
<span class="verse" id="R119_12">12&#160;</span> And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_13">13&#160;</span> Be of good courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do <span class='add'>that which is</span> good in his sight. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_14">14&#160;</span> So Joab and the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him drew nigh before the Syrians unto the battle; and they fled before him. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_15">15&#160;</span> And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R119_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians that <span class='add'>were</span> beyond the river: and Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer <span class='add'>went</span> before them.
<span class="verse" id="R119_17">17&#160;</span> And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel, and passed over Jordan, and came upon them, and set <span class='add'>the battle</span> in array against them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they fought with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_18">18&#160;</span> But the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew of the Syrians seven thousand <span class='add'>men which fought in</span> chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the host. 
<span class="verse" id="R119_19">19&#160;</span> And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and became his servants: neither would the Syrians help the children of Ammon any more.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R120_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R120_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that after the year was expired, at the time that kings go out <span class='add'>to battle</span>, Joab led forth the power of the army, and wasted the country of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David tarried at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and destroyed it.
<span class="verse" id="R120_2">2&#160;</span> And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and <span class='add'>there were</span> precious stones in it; and it was set upon David’s head: and he brought also exceeding much spoil out of the city.
<span class="verse" id="R120_3">3&#160;</span> And he brought out the people that <span class='add'>were</span> in it, and cut <span class='add'>them</span> with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. Even so dealt David with all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R120_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines; at which time Sibbechai the Hushathite slew Sippai, <span class='add'>that was</span> of the children of the giant: and they were subdued.
<span class="verse" id="R120_5">5&#160;</span> And there was war again with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, whose spear staff <span class='add'>was</span> like a weaver’s beam.
<span class="verse" id="R120_6">6&#160;</span> And yet again there was war at Gath, where was a man of <span class='add'>great</span> stature, whose fingers and toes <span class='add'>were</span> four and twenty, six <span class='add'>on each hand</span>, and six <span class='add'>on each foot:</span> and he also was the son of the giant.
<span class="verse" id="R120_7">7&#160;</span> But when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David’s brother slew him.
<span class="verse" id="R120_8">8&#160;</span> These were born unto the giant in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R121_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_1">1&#160;</span> And Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_2">2&#160;</span> And David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people, Go, number Israel from Beer-sheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them to me, that I may know <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_3">3&#160;</span> And Joab answered, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> make his people an hundred times so many more as they <span class='add'>be:</span> but, my lord the king, <span class='add'>are</span> they not all my lord’s servants? why then doth my lord require this thing? why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="R121_4">4&#160;</span> Nevertheless the king’s word prevailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab departed, and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David. And all <span class='add'>they of</span> Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand men that drew sword: and Judah <span class='add'>was</span> four hundred threescore and ten thousand men that drew sword. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_6">6&#160;</span> But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them: for the king’s word was abominable to Joab. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_7">7&#160;</span> And God was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote Israel.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="R121_8">8&#160;</span> And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because I have done this thing: but now, I beseech thee, do away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Gad, David’s seer, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R121_10">10&#160;</span> Go and tell David, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I offer thee three <span class='add'>things:</span> choose thee one of them, that I may do <span class='add'>it</span> unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="R121_11">11&#160;</span> So Gad came to David, and said unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Choose thee
<span class="verse" id="R121_12">12&#160;</span> Either three years’ famine; or three months to be destroyed before thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies overtaketh <span class='add'>thee;</span> or else three days the sword of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even the pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> destroying throughout all the coasts of Israel. Now therefore advise thyself what word I shall bring again to him that sent me. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_13">13&#160;</span> And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall now into the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for very great <span class='add'>are</span> his mercies: but let me not fall into the hand of man.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_14">14&#160;</span>¶ So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent pestilence upon Israel: and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_15">15&#160;</span> And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was destroying, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand. And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood by the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
<span class="verse" id="R121_16">16&#160;</span> And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stand between the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders <span class='add'>of Israel, who were</span> clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_17">17&#160;</span> And David said unto God, <span class='add'>Is it</span> not I <span class='add'>that</span> commanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned and done evil indeed; but <span class='add'>as for</span> these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, be on me, and on my father’s house; but not on thy people, that they should be plagued. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Gad to say to David, that David should go up, and set up an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_19">19&#160;</span> And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spake in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_20">20&#160;</span> And Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.
<span class="verse" id="R121_21">21&#160;</span> And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went out of the threshingfloor, and bowed himself to David with <span class='add'>his</span> face to the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_22">22&#160;</span> Then David said to Ornan, Grant me the place of <span class='add'>this</span> threshingfloor, that I may build an altar therein unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: thou shalt grant it me for the full price: that the plague may be stayed from the people.
<span class="verse" id="R121_23">23&#160;</span> And Ornan said unto David, Take <span class='add'>it</span> to thee, and let my lord the king do <span class='add'>that which is</span> good in his eyes: lo, I give <span class='add'>thee</span> the oxen <span class='add'>also</span> for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the wheat for the meat offering; I give it all. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_24">24&#160;</span> And king David said to Ornan, Nay; but I will verily buy it for the full price: for I will not take <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> thine for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor offer burnt offerings without cost. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_25">25&#160;</span> So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_26">26&#160;</span> And David built there an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_27">27&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded the angel; and he put up his sword again into the sheath thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R121_28">28&#160;</span>¶ At that time when David saw that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had answered him in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_29">29&#160;</span> For the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of the burnt offering, <span class='add'>were</span> at that season in the high place at Gibeon. 
<span class="verse" id="R121_30">30&#160;</span> But David could not go before it to enquire of God: for he was afraid because of the sword of the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R122_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R122_1">1&#160;</span> Then David said, This <span class='add'>is</span> the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, and this <span class='add'>is</span> the altar of the burnt offering for Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_2">2&#160;</span> And David commanded to gather together the strangers that <span class='add'>were</span> in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_3">3&#160;</span> And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the joinings; and brass in abundance without weight; 
<span class="verse" id="R122_4">4&#160;</span> Also cedar trees in abundance: for the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought much cedar wood to David. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_5">5&#160;</span> And David said, Solomon my son <span class='add'>is</span> young and tender, and the house <span class='add'>that is</span> to be builded for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>must be</span> exceeding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all countries: I will <span class='add'>therefore</span> now make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R122_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build an house for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_7">7&#160;</span> And David said to Solomon, My son, as for me, it was in my mind to build an house unto the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God: 
<span class="verse" id="R122_8">8&#160;</span> But the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name, because thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_9">9&#160;</span> Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel in his days.
<span class="verse" id="R122_10">10&#160;</span> He shall build an house for my name; and he shall be my son, and I <span class='add'>will be</span> his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_11">11&#160;</span> Now, my son, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be with thee; and prosper thou, and build the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, as he hath said of thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_12">12&#160;</span> Only the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> give thee wisdom and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel, that thou mayest keep the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_13">13&#160;</span> Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to fulfil the statutes and judgments which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> charged Moses with concerning Israel: be strong, and of good courage; dread not, nor be dismayed. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_14">14&#160;</span> Now, behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight; for it is in abundance: timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest add thereto.
<span class="verse" id="R122_15">15&#160;</span>Moreover <span class='add'>there are</span> workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber, and all manner of cunning men for every manner of work.
<span class="verse" id="R122_16">16&#160;</span> Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, <span class='add'>there is</span> no number. Arise <span class='add'>therefore</span>, and be doing, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R122_17">17&#160;</span>¶ David also commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son, <span class='add'>saying</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="R122_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God with you? and hath he <span class='add'>not</span> given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and before his people. 
<span class="verse" id="R122_19">19&#160;</span> Now set your heart and your soul to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God; arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, to bring the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R123_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R123_1">1&#160;</span> So when David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son king over Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R123_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_3">3&#160;</span> Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and upward: and their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty and eight thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_4">4&#160;</span> Of which, twenty and four thousand <span class='add'>were</span> to set forward the work of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and six thousand <span class='add'>were</span> officers and judges:
<span class="verse" id="R123_5">5&#160;</span> Moreover four thousand <span class='add'>were</span> porters; and four thousand praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with the instruments which I made, <span class='add'>said David</span>, to praise <span class='add'>therewith</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_6">6&#160;</span> And David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi, <span class='add'>namely</span>, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R123_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Of the Gershonites <span class='add'>were</span>, Laadan, and Shimei.
<span class="verse" id="R123_8">8&#160;</span> The sons of Laadan; the chief <span class='add'>was</span> Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel, three. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_9">9&#160;</span> The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These <span class='add'>were</span> the chief of the fathers of Laadan. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_10">10&#160;</span> And the sons of Shimei <span class='add'>were</span>, Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Shimei.
<span class="verse" id="R123_11">11&#160;</span> And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second: but Jeush and Beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning, according to <span class='add'>their</span> father’s house.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R123_12">12&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_13">13&#160;</span> The sons of Amram; Aaron and Moses: and Aaron was separated, that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for ever, to burn incense before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to minister unto him, and to bless in his name for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_14">14&#160;</span>Now <span class='add'>concerning</span> Moses the man of God, his sons were named of the tribe of Levi. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_15">15&#160;</span> The sons of Moses <span class='add'>were</span>, Gershom, and Eliezer. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_16">16&#160;</span> Of the sons of Gershom, Shebuel <span class='add'>was</span> the chief.
<span class="verse" id="R123_17">17&#160;</span> And the sons of Eliezer <span class='add'>were</span>, Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had none other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.
<span class="verse" id="R123_18">18&#160;</span> Of the sons of Izhar; Shelomith the chief.
<span class="verse" id="R123_19">19&#160;</span> Of the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_20">20&#160;</span> Of the sons of Uzziel; Michah the first, and Jesiah the second. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R123_21">21&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. The sons of Mahli; Eleazar, and Kish. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_22">22&#160;</span> And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their brethren the sons of Kish took them.
<span class="verse" id="R123_23">23&#160;</span> The sons of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R123_24">24&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Levi after the house of their fathers; <span class='add'>even</span> the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names by their polls, that did the work for the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, from the age of twenty years and upward. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_25">25&#160;</span> For David said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel hath given rest unto his people, that they may dwell in Jerusalem for ever:
<span class="verse" id="R123_26">26&#160;</span> And also unto the Levites; they shall no <span class='add'>more</span> carry the tabernacle, nor any vessels of it for the service thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="R123_27">27&#160;</span> For by the last words of David the Levites <span class='add'>were</span> numbered from twenty years old and above:
<span class="verse" id="R123_28">28&#160;</span> Because their office <span class='add'>was</span> to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things, and the work of the service of the house of God;
<span class="verse" id="R123_29">29&#160;</span> Both for the shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat offering, and for the unleavened cakes, and for <span class='add'>that which is baked in</span> the pan, and for that which is fried, and for all manner of measure and size;
<span class="verse" id="R123_30">30&#160;</span> And to stand every morning to thank and praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and likewise at even; 
<span class="verse" id="R123_31">31&#160;</span> And to offer all burnt sacrifices unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the sabbaths, in the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number, according to the order commanded unto them, continually before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="R123_32">32&#160;</span> And that they should keep the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R124_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R124_1">1&#160;</span>Now <span class='add'>these are</span> the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_2">2&#160;</span> But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_3">3&#160;</span> And David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their offices in their service. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_4">4&#160;</span> And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar; and <span class='add'>thus</span> were they divided. Among the sons of Eleazar <span class='add'>there were</span> sixteen chief men of the house of <span class='add'>their</span> fathers, and eight among the sons of Ithamar according to the house of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_5">5&#160;</span> Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the governors of the sanctuary, and governors <span class='add'>of the house</span> of God, were of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_6">6&#160;</span> And Shemaiah the son of Nethaneel the scribe, <span class='add'>one</span> of the Levites, wrote them before the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and <span class='add'>before</span> the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites: one principal household being taken for Eleazar, and <span class='add'>one</span> taken for Ithamar.
<span class="verse" id="R124_7">7&#160;</span> Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_8">8&#160;</span> The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_9">9&#160;</span> The fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_10">10&#160;</span> The seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_11">11&#160;</span> The ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_12">12&#160;</span> The eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_13">13&#160;</span> The thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_14">14&#160;</span> The fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_15">15&#160;</span> The seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Aphses, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_16">16&#160;</span> The nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezekel, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_17">17&#160;</span> The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul, 
<span class="verse" id="R124_18">18&#160;</span> The three and twentieth to Delaiah, the four and twentieth to Maaziah. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_19">19&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> the orderings of them in their service to come into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to their manner, under Aaron their father, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel had commanded him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R124_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the rest of the sons of Levi <span class='add'>were these:</span> Of the sons of Amram; Shubael: of the sons of Shubael; Jehdeiah.
<span class="verse" id="R124_21">21&#160;</span> Concerning Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, the first <span class='add'>was</span> Isshiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_22">22&#160;</span> Of the Izharites; Shelomoth: of the sons of Shelomoth; Jahath.
<span class="verse" id="R124_23">23&#160;</span> And the sons <span class='add'>of Hebron;</span> Jeriah <span class='add'>the first</span>, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Of</span> the sons of Uzziel; Michah: of the sons of Michah; Shamir. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_25">25&#160;</span> The brother of Michah <span class='add'>was</span> Isshiah: of the sons of Isshiah; Zechariah. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_26">26&#160;</span> The sons of Merari <span class='add'>were</span> Mahli and Mushi: the sons of Jaaziah; Beno. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R124_27">27&#160;</span>¶ The sons of Merari by Jaaziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_28">28&#160;</span> Of Mahli <span class='add'>came</span> Eleazar, who had no sons. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_29">29&#160;</span> Concerning Kish: the son of Kish <span class='add'>was</span> Jerahmeel. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_30">30&#160;</span> The sons also of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of the Levites after the house of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R124_31">31&#160;</span> These likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites, even the principal fathers over against their younger brethren.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R125_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R125_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the number of the workmen according to their service was: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_2">2&#160;</span> Of the sons of Asaph; Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied according to the order of the king.
<span class="verse" id="R125_3">3&#160;</span> Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R125_4">4&#160;</span> Of Heman: the sons of Heman; Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, <span class='add'>and</span> Mahazioth:
<span class="verse" id="R125_5">5&#160;</span>All these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Heman the king’s seer in the words of God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
<span class="verse" id="R125_6">6&#160;</span>All these <span class='add'>were</span> under the hands of their father for song <span class='add'>in</span> the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God, according to the king’s order to Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman.
<span class="verse" id="R125_7">7&#160;</span> So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in the songs of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> all that were cunning, was two hundred fourscore and eight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R125_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And they cast lots, ward against <span class='add'>ward</span>, as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar. 
<span class="verse" id="R125_9">9&#160;</span> Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_10">10&#160;</span> The third to Zaccur, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_11">11&#160;</span> The fourth to Izri, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_12">12&#160;</span> The fifth to Nethaniah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_13">13&#160;</span> The sixth to Bukkiah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_14">14&#160;</span> The seventh to Jesharelah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_15">15&#160;</span> The eighth to Jeshaiah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_16">16&#160;</span> The ninth to Mattaniah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_17">17&#160;</span> The tenth to Shimei, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_18">18&#160;</span> The eleventh to Azareel, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_19">19&#160;</span> The twelfth to Hashabiah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_20">20&#160;</span> The thirteenth to Shubael, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_21">21&#160;</span> The fourteenth to Mattithiah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_22">22&#160;</span> The fifteenth to Jeremoth, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_23">23&#160;</span> The sixteenth to Hananiah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_24">24&#160;</span> The seventeenth to Joshbekashah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_25">25&#160;</span> The eighteenth to Hanani, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_26">26&#160;</span> The nineteenth to Mallothi, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_27">27&#160;</span> The twentieth to Eliathah, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_28">28&#160;</span> The one and twentieth to Hothir, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_29">29&#160;</span> The two and twentieth to Giddalti, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_30">30&#160;</span> The three and twentieth to Mahazioth, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve: 
<span class="verse" id="R125_31">31&#160;</span> The four and twentieth to Romamti-ezer, <span class='add'>he</span>, his sons, and his brethren, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R126_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R126_1">1&#160;</span> Concerning the divisions of the porters: Of the Korhites <span class='add'>was</span> Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.
<span class="verse" id="R126_2">2&#160;</span> And the sons of Meshelemiah <span class='add'>were</span>, Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, 
<span class="verse" id="R126_3">3&#160;</span> Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_4">4&#160;</span> Moreover the sons of Obed-edom <span class='add'>were</span>, Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethaneel the fifth, 
<span class="verse" id="R126_5">5&#160;</span> Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for God blessed him.
<span class="verse" id="R126_6">6&#160;</span> Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled throughout the house of their father: for they <span class='add'>were</span> mighty men of valour. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_7">7&#160;</span> The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brethren <span class='add'>were</span> strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_8">8&#160;</span> All these of the sons of Obed-edom: they and their sons and their brethren, able men for strength for the service, <span class='add'>were</span> threescore and two of Obed-edom. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_9">9&#160;</span> And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, strong men, eighteen. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_10">10&#160;</span> Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the chief, (for <span class='add'>though</span> he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him the chief;) 
<span class="verse" id="R126_11">11&#160;</span> Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brethren of Hosah <span class='add'>were</span> thirteen. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_12">12&#160;</span>Among these <span class='add'>were</span> the divisions of the porters, <span class='add'>even</span> among the chief men, <span class='add'>having</span> wards one against another, to minister in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R126_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And they cast lots, as well the small as the great, according to the house of their fathers, for every gate.
<span class="verse" id="R126_14">14&#160;</span> And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a wise counsellor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward.
<span class="verse" id="R126_15">15&#160;</span> To Obed-edom southward; and to his sons the house of Asuppim.
<span class="verse" id="R126_16">16&#160;</span> To Shuppim and Hosah <span class='add'>the lot came forth</span> westward, with the gate Shallecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_17">17&#160;</span> Eastward <span class='add'>were</span> six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a day, and toward Asuppim two <span class='add'>and</span> two. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_18">18&#160;</span> At Parbar westward, four at the causeway, <span class='add'>and</span> two at Parbar. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_19">19&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the divisions of the porters among the sons of Kore, and among the sons of Merari. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R126_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And of the Levites, Ahijah <span class='add'>was</span> over the treasures of the house of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.
<span class="verse" id="R126_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As concerning</span> the sons of Laadan; the sons of the Gershonite Laadan, chief fathers, <span class='add'>even</span> of Laadan the Gershonite, <span class='add'>were</span> Jehieli.
<span class="verse" id="R126_22">22&#160;</span> The sons of Jehieli; Zetham, and Joel his brother, <span class='add'>which were</span> over the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_23">23&#160;</span> Of the Amramites, <span class='add'>and</span> the Izharites, the Hebronites, <span class='add'>and</span> the Uzzielites: 
<span class="verse" id="R126_24">24&#160;</span> And Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, <span class='add'>was</span> ruler of the treasures. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_25">25&#160;</span> And his brethren by Eliezer; Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_26">26&#160;</span> Which Shelomith and his brethren <span class='add'>were</span> over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which David the king, and the chief fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_27">27&#160;</span> Out of the spoils won in battles did they dedicate to maintain the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R126_28">28&#160;</span> And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; <span class='add'>and</span> whosoever had dedicated <span class='add'>any thing, it was</span> under the hand of Shelomith, and of his brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R126_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons <span class='add'>were</span> for the outward business over Israel, for officers and judges. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valour, a thousand and seven hundred, <span class='add'>were</span> officers among them of Israel on this side Jordan westward in all the business of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and in the service of the king.
<span class="verse" id="R126_31">31&#160;</span> Among the Hebronites <span class='add'>was</span> Jerijah the chief, <span class='add'>even</span> among the Hebronites, according to the generations of his fathers. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R126_32">32&#160;</span> And his brethren, men of valour, <span class='add'>were</span> two thousand and seven hundred chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, for every matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the king.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R127_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R127_1">1&#160;</span> Now the children of Israel after their number, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, the chief fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers that served the king in any matter of the courses, which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year, of every course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_2">2&#160;</span> Over the first course for the first month <span class='add'>was</span> Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_3">3&#160;</span> Of the children of Perez <span class='add'>was</span> the chief of all the captains of the host for the first month. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_4">4&#160;</span> And over the course of the second month <span class='add'>was</span> Dodai an Ahohite, and of his course <span class='add'>was</span> Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand.
<span class="verse" id="R127_5">5&#160;</span> The third captain of the host for the third month <span class='add'>was</span> Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand.
<span class="verse" id="R127_6">6&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is that</span> Benaiah, <span class='add'>who was</span> mighty <span class='add'>among</span> the thirty, and above the thirty: and in his course <span class='add'>was</span> Ammizabad his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_7">7&#160;</span> The fourth <span class='add'>captain</span> for the fourth month <span class='add'>was</span> Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_8">8&#160;</span> The fifth captain for the fifth month <span class='add'>was</span> Shamhuth the Izrahite: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_9">9&#160;</span> The sixth <span class='add'>captain</span> for the sixth month <span class='add'>was</span> Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_10">10&#160;</span> The seventh <span class='add'>captain</span> for the seventh month <span class='add'>was</span> Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_11">11&#160;</span> The eighth <span class='add'>captain</span> for the eighth month <span class='add'>was</span> Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_12">12&#160;</span> The ninth <span class='add'>captain</span> for the ninth month <span class='add'>was</span> Abi-ezer the Anetothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_13">13&#160;</span> The tenth <span class='add'>captain</span> for the tenth month <span class='add'>was</span> Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_14">14&#160;</span> The eleventh <span class='add'>captain</span> for the eleventh month <span class='add'>was</span> Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_15">15&#160;</span> The twelfth <span class='add'>captain</span> for the twelfth month <span class='add'>was</span> Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course <span class='add'>were</span> twenty and four thousand.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R127_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the Reubenites <span class='add'>was</span> Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maachah: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_17">17&#160;</span> Of the Levites, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, Zadok: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_18">18&#160;</span> Of Judah, Elihu, <span class='add'>one</span> of the brethren of David: of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael:
<span class="verse" id="R127_19">19&#160;</span> Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_20">20&#160;</span> Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah: of the half tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_21">21&#160;</span> Of the half <span class='add'>tribe</span> of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah: of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_22">22&#160;</span> Of Dan, Azareel the son of Jeroham. These <span class='add'>were</span> the princes of the tribes of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R127_23">23&#160;</span>¶ But David took not the number of them from twenty years old and under: because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said he would increase Israel like to the stars of the heavens. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_24">24&#160;</span> Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he finished not, because there fell wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number put in the account of the chronicles of king David.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R127_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And over the king’s treasures <span class='add'>was</span> Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the castles, <span class='add'>was</span> Jehonathan the son of Uzziah: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_26">26&#160;</span> And over them that did the work of the field for tillage of the ground <span class='add'>was</span> Ezri the son of Chelub: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_27">27&#160;</span> And over the vineyards <span class='add'>was</span> Shimei the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine cellars <span class='add'>was</span> Zabdi the Shiphmite:
<span class="verse" id="R127_28">28&#160;</span> And over the olive trees and the sycomore trees that <span class='add'>were</span> in the low plains <span class='add'>was</span> Baal-hanan the Gederite: and over the cellars of oil <span class='add'>was</span> Joash: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_29">29&#160;</span> And over the herds that fed in Sharon <span class='add'>was</span> Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds <span class='add'>that were</span> in the valleys <span class='add'>was</span> Shaphat the son of Adlai: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_30">30&#160;</span> Over the camels also <span class='add'>was</span> Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the asses <span class='add'>was</span> Jehdeiah the Meronothite: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_31">31&#160;</span> And over the flocks <span class='add'>was</span> Jaziz the Hagerite. All these <span class='add'>were</span> the rulers of the substance which <span class='add'>was</span> king David’s. 
<span class="verse" id="R127_32">32&#160;</span> Also Jonathan David’s uncle was a counsellor, a wise man, and a scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni <span class='add'>was</span> with the king’s sons:
<span class="verse" id="R127_33">33&#160;</span> And Ahithophel <span class='add'>was</span> the king’s counsellor: and Hushai the Archite <span class='add'>was</span> the king’s companion: 
<span class="verse" id="R127_34">34&#160;</span> And after Ahithophel <span class='add'>was</span> Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar: and the general of the king’s army <span class='add'>was</span> Joab.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R128_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R128_1">1&#160;</span> And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the hundreds, and the stewards over all the substance and possession of the king, and of his sons, with the officers, and with the mighty men, and with all the valiant men, unto Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="R128_2">2&#160;</span> Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my brethren, and my people: <span class='add'>As for me</span>, I <span class='add'>had</span> in mine heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for the footstool of our God, and had made ready for the building: 
<span class="verse" id="R128_3">3&#160;</span> But God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, because thou <span class='add'>hast been</span> a man of war, and hast shed blood.
<span class="verse" id="R128_4">4&#160;</span> Howbeit the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel chose me before all the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah <span class='add'>to be</span> the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he liked me to make <span class='add'>me</span> king over all Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="R128_5">5&#160;</span> And of all my sons, (for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given me many sons,) he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> over Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_6">6&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts: for I have chosen him <span class='add'>to be</span> my son, and I will be his father. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_7">7&#160;</span> Moreover I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my commandments and my judgments, as at this day.
<span class="verse" id="R128_8">8&#160;</span> Now therefore in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God: that ye may possess this good land, and leave <span class='add'>it</span> for an inheritance for your children after you for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R128_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_10">10&#160;</span> Take heed now; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath chosen thee to build an house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R128_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the inner parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy seat, 
<span class="verse" id="R128_12">12&#160;</span> And the pattern of all that he had by the spirit, of the courts of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and of all the chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the dedicated things:
<span class="verse" id="R128_13">13&#160;</span> Also for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for all the vessels of service in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He gave</span> of gold by weight for <span class='add'>things</span> of gold, for all instruments of all manner of service; <span class='add'>silver also</span> for all instruments of silver by weight, for all instruments of every kind of service: 
<span class="verse" id="R128_15">15&#160;</span> Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for their lamps of gold, by weight for every candlestick, and for the lamps thereof: and for the candlesticks of silver by weight, <span class='add'>both</span> for the candlestick, and <span class='add'>also</span> for the lamps thereof, according to the use of every candlestick. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_16">16&#160;</span> And by weight <span class='add'>he gave</span> gold for the tables of shewbread, for every table; and <span class='add'>likewise</span> silver for the tables of silver: 
<span class="verse" id="R128_17">17&#160;</span> Also pure gold for the fleshhooks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the golden basons <span class='add'>he gave gold</span> by weight for every bason; and <span class='add'>likewise silver</span> by weight for every bason of silver: 
<span class="verse" id="R128_18">18&#160;</span> And for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the pattern of the chariot of the cherubims, that spread out <span class='add'>their wings</span>, and covered the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_19">19&#160;</span>All <span class='add'>this, said David</span>, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made me understand in writing by <span class='add'>his</span> hand upon me, <span class='add'>even</span> all the works of this pattern. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_20">20&#160;</span> And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good courage, and do <span class='add'>it:</span> fear not, nor be dismayed: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, <span class='add'>even</span> my God, <span class='add'>will be</span> with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until thou hast finished all the work for the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R128_21">21&#160;</span> And, behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites, <span class='add'>even they shall be with thee</span> for all the service of the house of God: and <span class='add'>there shall be</span> with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing skilful man, for any manner of service: also the princes and all the people <span class='add'>will be</span> wholly at thy commandment.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='R129_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R129_1">1&#160;</span> Furthermore David the king said unto all the congregation, Solomon my son, whom alone God hath chosen, <span class='add'>is yet</span> young and tender, and the work <span class='add'>is</span> great: for the palace <span class='add'>is</span> not for man, but for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_2">2&#160;</span> Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the gold for <span class='add'>things to be made</span> of gold, and the silver for <span class='add'>things</span> of silver, and the brass for <span class='add'>things</span> of brass, the iron for <span class='add'>things</span> of iron, and wood for <span class='add'>things</span> of wood; onyx stones, and <span class='add'>stones</span> to be set, glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_3">3&#160;</span> Moreover, because I have set my affection to the house of my God, I have of mine own proper good, of gold and silver, <span class='add'>which</span> I have given to the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house, 
<span class="verse" id="R129_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses <span class='add'>withal:</span> 
<span class="verse" id="R129_5">5&#160;</span> The gold for <span class='add'>things</span> of gold, and the silver for <span class='add'>things</span> of silver, and for all manner of work <span class='add'>to be made</span> by the hands of artificers. And who <span class='add'>then</span> is willing to consecrate his service this day unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R129_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then the chief of the fathers and princes of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers of the king’s work, offered willingly, 
<span class="verse" id="R129_7">7&#160;</span> And gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_8">8&#160;</span>And they with whom <span class='add'>precious</span> stones were found gave <span class='add'>them</span> to the treasure of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, by the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_9">9&#160;</span> Then the people rejoiced, for that they offered willingly, because with perfect heart they offered willingly to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and David the king also rejoiced with great joy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R129_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore David blessed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before all the congregation: and David said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> thou, <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel our father, for ever and ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_11">11&#160;</span> Thine, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>is</span> the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all <span class='add'>that is</span> in the heaven and in the earth <span class='add'>is thine;</span> thine <span class='add'>is</span> the kingdom, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thou art exalted as head above all. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_12">12&#160;</span> Both riches and honour <span class='add'>come</span> of thee, and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand <span class='add'>is</span> power and might; and in thine hand <span class='add'>it is</span> to make great, and to give strength unto all. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_13">13&#160;</span> Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_14">14&#160;</span>But who <span class='add'>am</span> I, and what <span class='add'>is</span> my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things <span class='add'>come</span> of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.
<span class="verse" id="R129_15">15&#160;</span>For we <span class='add'>are</span> strangers before thee, and sojourners, as <span class='add'>were</span> all our fathers: our days on the earth <span class='add'>are</span> as a shadow, and <span class='add'>there is</span> none abiding.
<span class="verse" id="R129_16">16&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee an house for thine holy name <span class='add'>cometh</span> of thine hand, and <span class='add'>is</span> all thine own. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_17">17&#160;</span> I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I have willingly offered all these things: and now have I seen with joy thy people, which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="R129_18">18&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thee:
<span class="verse" id="R129_19">19&#160;</span> And give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do all <span class='add'>these things</span>, and to build the palace, <span class='add'>for</span> the which I have made provision. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R129_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And David said to all the congregation, Now bless the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. And all the congregation blessed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshipped the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the king. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_21">21&#160;</span> And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and offered burnt offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, on the morrow after that day, <span class='add'>even</span> a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, <span class='add'>and</span> a thousand lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="R129_22">22&#160;</span> And did eat and drink before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> on that day with great gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed <span class='add'>him</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>to be</span> the chief governor, and Zadok <span class='add'>to be</span> priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R129_23">23&#160;</span> Then Solomon sat on the throne of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_24">24&#160;</span> And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves unto Solomon the king.
<span class="verse" id="R129_25">25&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him <span class='add'>such</span> royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R129_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Thus David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_27">27&#160;</span> And the time that he reigned over Israel <span class='add'>was</span> forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and three <span class='add'>years</span> reigned he in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_28">28&#160;</span> And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour: and Solomon his son reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R129_29">29&#160;</span> Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer,
<span class="verse" id="R129_30">30&#160;</span> With all his reign and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
