<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 2 John 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 John</a></li>
</ul>
<div class='main' id='J20_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE SECOND EPISTLE OF JOHN  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='J21_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="J21_1">1&#160;</span> The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the truth;
<span class="verse" id="J21_2">2&#160;</span> For the truth’s sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be with us for ever.
<span class="verse" id="J21_3">3&#160;</span> Grace be with you, mercy, <span class='add'>and</span> peace, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="J21_4">4&#160;</span> I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.
<span class="verse" id="J21_5">5&#160;</span> And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another.
<span class="verse" id="J21_6">6&#160;</span> And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the commandment, That, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it.
<span class="verse" id="J21_7">7&#160;</span> For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist.
<span class="verse" id="J21_8">8&#160;</span> Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.
<span class="verse" id="J21_9">9&#160;</span> Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son.
<span class="verse" id="J21_10">10&#160;</span> If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into <span class='add'>your</span> house, neither bid him God speed:
<span class="verse" id="J21_11">11&#160;</span> For he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="J21_12">12&#160;</span> Having many things to write unto you, I would not <span class='add'>write</span> with paper and ink: but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be full.
<span class="verse" id="J21_13">13&#160;</span> The children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
