<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Ezekiel 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Ezekiel</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='EZK.xhtml#EK48_0'>48</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='EK0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of the Prophet Ezekiel  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="EK1_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth <span class='add'>month</span>, in the fifth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, as I <span class='add'>was</span> among the captives by the river of Chebar, <span class='add'>that</span> the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_2">2&#160;</span> In the fifth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, which <span class='add'>was</span> the fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity, 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_3">3&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came expressly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was there upon him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK1_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness <span class='add'>was</span> about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_5">5&#160;</span> Also out of the midst thereof <span class='add'>came</span> the likeness of four living creatures. And this <span class='add'>was</span> their appearance; they had the likeness of a man. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_6">6&#160;</span> And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_7">7&#160;</span> And their feet <span class='add'>were</span> straight feet; and the sole of their feet <span class='add'>was</span> like the sole of a calf’s foot: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_8">8&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>they had</span> the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_9">9&#160;</span> Their wings <span class='add'>were</span> joined one to another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_10">10&#160;</span> As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an eagle. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_11">11&#160;</span>Thus <span class='add'>were</span> their faces: and their wings <span class='add'>were</span> stretched upward; two <span class='add'>wings</span> of every one <span class='add'>were</span> joined one to another, and two covered their bodies.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_12">12&#160;</span> And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go, they went; <span class='add'>and</span> they turned not when they went. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_13">13&#160;</span> As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance <span class='add'>was</span> like burning coals of fire, <span class='add'>and</span> like the appearance of lamps: it went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_14">14&#160;</span> And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK1_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_16">16&#160;</span> The appearance of the wheels and their work <span class='add'>was</span> like unto the colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their appearance and their work <span class='add'>was</span> as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_17">17&#160;</span> When they went, they went upon their four sides: <span class='add'>and</span> they turned not when they went. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_18">18&#160;</span> As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings <span class='add'>were</span> full of eyes round about them four.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_19">19&#160;</span> And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_20">20&#160;</span> Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither <span class='add'>was their</span> spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature <span class='add'>was</span> in the wheels.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_21">21&#160;</span> When those went, <span class='add'>these</span> went; and when those stood, <span class='add'>these</span> stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature <span class='add'>was</span> in the wheels.
<span class="verse" id="EK1_22">22&#160;</span> And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living creature <span class='add'>was</span> as the colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_23">23&#160;</span> And under the firmament <span class='add'>were</span> their wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their bodies. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_24">24&#160;</span> And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host: when they stood, they let down their wings. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_25">25&#160;</span> And there was a voice from the firmament that <span class='add'>was</span> over their heads, when they stood, <span class='add'>and</span> had let down their wings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK1_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And above the firmament that <span class='add'>was</span> over their heads <span class='add'>was</span> the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the throne <span class='add'>was</span> the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_27">27&#160;</span> And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about. 
<span class="verse" id="EK1_28">28&#160;</span> As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so <span class='add'>was</span> the appearance of the brightness round about. This <span class='add'>was</span> the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And when I saw <span class='add'>it</span>, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK2_1">1&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK2_2">2&#160;</span> And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK2_3">3&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against me, <span class='add'>even</span> unto this very day.
<span class="verse" id="EK2_4">4&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>they are</span> impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK2_5">5&#160;</span> And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, (for they <span class='add'>are</span> a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK2_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns <span class='add'>be</span> with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they <span class='add'>be</span> a rebellious house.
<span class="verse" id="EK2_7">7&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear: for they <span class='add'>are</span> most rebellious.
<span class="verse" id="EK2_8">8&#160;</span> But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I give thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK2_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And when I looked, behold, an hand <span class='add'>was</span> sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book <span class='add'>was</span> therein; 
<span class="verse" id="EK2_10">10&#160;</span> And he spread it before me; and it <span class='add'>was</span> written within and without: and <span class='add'>there was</span> written therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK3_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_2">2&#160;</span> So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_3">3&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat <span class='add'>it;</span> and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK3_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_5">5&#160;</span>For thou <span class='add'>art</span> not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard language, <span class='add'>but</span> to the house of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="EK3_6">6&#160;</span> Not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK3_7">7&#160;</span> But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel <span class='add'>are</span> impudent and hardhearted.
<span class="verse" id="EK3_8">8&#160;</span> Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_9">9&#160;</span> As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they <span class='add'>be</span> a rebellious house. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_10">10&#160;</span> Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_11">11&#160;</span> And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_12">12&#160;</span> Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a great rushing, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from his place. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>I heard</span> also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them, and a noise of a great rushing.
<span class="verse" id="EK3_14">14&#160;</span> So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was strong upon me.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK3_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then I came to them of the captivity at Tel-abib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished among them seven days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK3_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_17">17&#160;</span> Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_18">18&#160;</span> When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked <span class='add'>man</span> shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_19">19&#160;</span> Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_20">20&#160;</span> Again, When a righteous <span class='add'>man</span> doth turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumblingblock before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="EK3_21">21&#160;</span> Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous <span class='add'>man</span>, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK3_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was there upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_23">23&#160;</span> Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river of Chebar: and I fell on my face. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_24">24&#160;</span> Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house. 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_25">25&#160;</span> But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them: 
<span class="verse" id="EK3_26">26&#160;</span> And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they <span class='add'>are</span> a rebellious house.
<span class="verse" id="EK3_27">27&#160;</span> But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; He that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they <span class='add'>are</span> a rebellious house.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK4_1">1&#160;</span> Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, <span class='add'>even</span> Jerusalem: 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_2">2&#160;</span> And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set <span class='add'>battering</span> rams against it round about.
<span class="verse" id="EK4_3">3&#160;</span> Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it <span class='add'>for</span> a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set thy face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sign to the house of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EK4_4">4&#160;</span> Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: <span class='add'>according</span> to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_5">5&#160;</span> For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred and ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_6">6&#160;</span> And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a year.
<span class="verse" id="EK4_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm <span class='add'>shall be</span> uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_8">8&#160;</span> And, behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another, till thou hast ended the days of thy siege.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK4_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread thereof, <span class='add'>according</span> to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EK4_10">10&#160;</span> And thy meat which thou shalt eat <span class='add'>shall be</span> by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_11">11&#160;</span> Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin: from time to time shalt thou drink. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt eat it <span class='add'>as</span> barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_14">14&#160;</span> Then said I, Ah Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! behold, my soul hath not been polluted: for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_15">15&#160;</span> Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow’s dung for man’s dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith. 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_16">16&#160;</span> Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with astonishment: 
<span class="verse" id="EK4_17">17&#160;</span> That they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK5_1">1&#160;</span> And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a barber’s razor, and cause <span class='add'>it</span> to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the <span class='add'>hair</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_2">2&#160;</span> Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third part, <span class='add'>and</span> smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_3">3&#160;</span> Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy skirts.
<span class="verse" id="EK5_4">4&#160;</span> Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; <span class='add'>for</span> thereof shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK5_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; This <span class='add'>is</span> Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries <span class='add'>that are</span> round about her. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_6">6&#160;</span> And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that <span class='add'>are</span> round about her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because ye multiplied more than the nations that <span class='add'>are</span> round about you, <span class='add'>and</span> have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according to the judgments of the nations that <span class='add'>are</span> round about you; 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I, even I, <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_9">9&#160;</span> And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_11">11&#160;</span>Wherefore, <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish <span class='add'>thee;</span> neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK5_12">12&#160;</span>¶ A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_13">13&#160;</span> Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span> in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_14">14&#160;</span> Moreover I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations that <span class='add'>are</span> round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_15">15&#160;</span> So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the nations that <span class='add'>are</span> round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes. I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_16">16&#160;</span> When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which shall be for <span class='add'>their</span> destruction, <span class='add'>and</span> which I will send to destroy you: and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread: 
<span class="verse" id="EK5_17">17&#160;</span> So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK6_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them, 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_3">3&#160;</span> And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places. 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_4">4&#160;</span> And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be broken: and I will cast down your slain <span class='add'>men</span> before your idols.
<span class="verse" id="EK6_5">5&#160;</span> And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.
<span class="verse" id="EK6_6">6&#160;</span> In all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images may be cut down, and your works may be abolished.
<span class="verse" id="EK6_7">7&#160;</span> And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK6_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have <span class='add'>some</span> that shall escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries. 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_9">9&#160;</span> And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_10">10&#160;</span> And they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and that</span> I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK6_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence. 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_12">12&#160;</span> He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_13">13&#160;</span> Then shall ye know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when their slain <span class='add'>men</span> shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to all their idols. 
<span class="verse" id="EK6_14">14&#160;</span> So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in all their habitations: and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK7_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_2">2&#160;</span> Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> unto the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_3">3&#160;</span>Now <span class='add'>is</span> the end <span class='add'>come</span> upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_4">4&#160;</span> And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_5">5&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_6">6&#160;</span> An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it is come.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_7">7&#160;</span> The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble <span class='add'>is</span> near, and not the sounding again of the mountains.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_8">8&#160;</span> Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine abominations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_9">9&#160;</span> And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations <span class='add'>that</span> are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that smiteth.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_10">10&#160;</span> Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_11">11&#160;</span> Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them <span class='add'>shall remain</span>, nor of their multitude, nor of any of theirs: neither <span class='add'>shall there be</span> wailing for them.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_12">12&#160;</span> The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath <span class='add'>is</span> upon all the multitude thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_13">13&#160;</span> For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision <span class='add'>is</span> touching the whole multitude thereof, <span class='add'>which</span> shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_14">14&#160;</span> They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none goeth to the battle: for my wrath <span class='add'>is</span> upon all the multitude thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_15">15&#160;</span> The sword <span class='add'>is</span> without, and the pestilence and the famine within: he that <span class='add'>is</span> in the field shall die with the sword; and he that <span class='add'>is</span> in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK7_16">16&#160;</span>¶ But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_17">17&#160;</span> All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak <span class='add'>as</span> water.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_18">18&#160;</span> They shall also gird <span class='add'>themselves</span> with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_19">19&#160;</span> They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK7_20">20&#160;</span>¶ As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they made the images of their abominations <span class='add'>and</span> of their detestable things therein: therefore have I set it far from them.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_21">21&#160;</span> And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_22">22&#160;</span> My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my secret <span class='add'>place:</span> for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK7_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Make a chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_24">24&#160;</span> Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_25">25&#160;</span> Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and <span class='add'>there shall be</span> none.
<span class="verse" id="EK7_26">26&#160;</span> Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients. 
<span class="verse" id="EK7_27">27&#160;</span> The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK8_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth <span class='add'>month</span>, in the fifth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>as</span> I sat in mine house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> fell there upon me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_2">2&#160;</span> Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from the appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins even upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of amber. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_3">3&#160;</span> And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where <span class='add'>was</span> the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_4">4&#160;</span> And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel <span class='add'>was</span> there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK8_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in the entry. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_6">6&#160;</span> He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? <span class='add'>even</span> the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again, <span class='add'>and</span> thou shalt see greater abominations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK8_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_8">8&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I had digged in the wall, behold a door. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_10">10&#160;</span> So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed upon the wall round about. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_11">11&#160;</span> And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_12">12&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> seeth us not; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath forsaken the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK8_13">13&#160;</span>¶ He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, <span class='add'>and</span> thou shalt see greater abominations that they do. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_14">14&#160;</span> Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house which <span class='add'>was</span> toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK8_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen <span class='add'>this</span>, O son of man? turn thee yet again, <span class='add'>and</span> thou shalt see greater abominations than these. 
<span class="verse" id="EK8_16">16&#160;</span> And he brought me into the inner court of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, and, behold, at the door of the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, between the porch and the altar, <span class='add'>were</span> about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and their faces toward the east; and they worshipped the sun toward the east. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK8_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen <span class='add'>this</span>, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch to their nose.
<span class="verse" id="EK8_18">18&#160;</span> Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, <span class='add'>yet</span> will I not hear them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK9_1">1&#160;</span> He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man <span class='add'>with</span> his destroying weapon in his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK9_2">2&#160;</span> And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man among them <span class='add'>was</span> clothed with linen, with a writer’s inkhorn by his side: and they went in, and stood beside the brasen altar.
<span class="verse" id="EK9_3">3&#160;</span> And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub, whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. And he called to the man clothed with linen, which <span class='add'>had</span> the writer’s inkhorn by his side; 
<span class="verse" id="EK9_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK9_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity:
<span class="verse" id="EK9_6">6&#160;</span> Slay utterly old <span class='add'>and</span> young, both maids, and little children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom <span class='add'>is</span> the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which <span class='add'>were</span> before the house.
<span class="verse" id="EK9_7">7&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK9_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem? 
<span class="verse" id="EK9_9">9&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah <span class='add'>is</span> exceeding great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness: for they say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath forsaken the earth, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> seeth not.
<span class="verse" id="EK9_10">10&#160;</span> And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, <span class='add'>but</span> I will recompense their way upon their head. 
<span class="verse" id="EK9_11">11&#160;</span> And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which <span class='add'>had</span> the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast commanded me.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK10_1">1&#160;</span> Then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that was above the head of the cherubims there appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_2">2&#160;</span> And he spake unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in between the wheels, <span class='add'>even</span> under the cherub, and fill thine hand with coals of fire from between the cherubims, and scatter <span class='add'>them</span> over the city. And he went in in my sight.
<span class="verse" id="EK10_3">3&#160;</span> Now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_4">4&#160;</span> Then the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went up from the cherub, <span class='add'>and stood</span> over the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> glory.
<span class="verse" id="EK10_5">5&#160;</span> And the sound of the cherubims’ wings was heard <span class='add'>even</span> to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_6">6&#160;</span>And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when he had commanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between the cherubims; then he went in, and stood beside the wheels. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubims unto the fire that <span class='add'>was</span> between the cherubims, and took <span class='add'>thereof</span>, and put <span class='add'>it</span> into the hands of <span class='add'>him that was</span> clothed with linen: who took <span class='add'>it</span>, and went out.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK10_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man’s hand under their wings. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_9">9&#160;</span> And when I looked, behold the four wheels by the cherubims, one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub: and the appearance of the wheels <span class='add'>was</span> as the colour of a beryl stone. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_10">10&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_11">11&#160;</span> When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the head looked they followed it; they turned not as they went. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_12">12&#160;</span> And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, <span class='add'>were</span> full of eyes round about, <span class='add'>even</span> the wheels that they four had.
<span class="verse" id="EK10_13">13&#160;</span> As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O wheel.
<span class="verse" id="EK10_14">14&#160;</span> And every one had four faces: the first face <span class='add'>was</span> the face of a cherub, and the second face <span class='add'>was</span> the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_15">15&#160;</span> And the cherubims were lifted up. This <span class='add'>is</span> the living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_16">16&#160;</span> And when the cherubims went, the wheels went by them: and when the cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the same wheels also turned not from beside them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_17">17&#160;</span> When they stood, <span class='add'>these</span> stood; and when they were lifted up, <span class='add'>these</span> lifted up themselves <span class='add'>also:</span> for the spirit of the living creature <span class='add'>was</span> in them.
<span class="verse" id="EK10_18">18&#160;</span> Then the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> departed from off the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubims. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_19">19&#160;</span> And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also <span class='add'>were</span> beside them, and <span class='add'>every one</span> stood at the door of the east gate of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house; and the glory of the God of Israel <span class='add'>was</span> over them above. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_20">20&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and I knew that they <span class='add'>were</span> the cherubims. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_21">21&#160;</span> Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man <span class='add'>was</span> under their wings. 
<span class="verse" id="EK10_22">22&#160;</span> And the likeness of their faces <span class='add'>was</span> the same faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, their appearances and themselves: they went every one straight forward.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK11_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house, which looketh eastward: and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_2">2&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, Son of man, these <span class='add'>are</span> the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city: 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_3">3&#160;</span> Which say, <span class='add'>It is</span> not near; let us build houses: this <span class='add'>city is</span> the caldron, and we <span class='add'>be</span> the flesh.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK11_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_5">5&#160;</span> And the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know the things that come into your mind, <span class='add'>every one of</span> them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_6">6&#160;</span> Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they <span class='add'>are</span> the flesh, and this <span class='add'>city is</span> the caldron: but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_8">8&#160;</span> Ye have feared the sword; and I will bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_9">9&#160;</span> And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_10">10&#160;</span> Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_11">11&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>city</span> shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; <span class='add'>but</span> I will judge you in the border of Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_12">12&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done after the manners of the heathen that <span class='add'>are</span> round about you.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK11_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK11_14">14&#160;</span> Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_15">15&#160;</span> Son of man, thy brethren, <span class='add'>even</span> thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel wholly, <span class='add'>are</span> they unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: unto us is this land given in possession. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will even gather you from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_18">18&#160;</span> And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from thence. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_19">19&#160;</span> And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh: 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_20">20&#160;</span> That they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_21">21&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for them</span> whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK11_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel <span class='add'>was</span> over them above. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_23">23&#160;</span> And the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which <span class='add'>is</span> on the east side of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK11_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK11_25">25&#160;</span> Then I spake unto them of the captivity all the things that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had shewed me.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK12_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes to see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not: for they <span class='add'>are</span> a rebellious house. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to another place in their sight: it may be they will consider, though they <span class='add'>be</span> a rebellious house.
<span class="verse" id="EK12_4">4&#160;</span> Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity.
<span class="verse" id="EK12_5">5&#160;</span> Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.
<span class="verse" id="EK12_6">6&#160;</span> In their sight shalt thou bear <span class='add'>it</span> upon <span class='add'>thy</span> shoulders, <span class='add'>and</span> carry <span class='add'>it</span> forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not the ground: for I have set thee <span class='add'>for</span> a sign unto the house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_7">7&#160;</span> And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for captivity, and in the even I digged through the wall with mine hand; I brought <span class='add'>it</span> forth in the twilight, <span class='add'>and</span> I bare <span class='add'>it</span> upon <span class='add'>my</span> shoulder in their sight.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK12_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And in the morning came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_9">9&#160;</span> Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said unto thee, What doest thou? 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_10">10&#160;</span> Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; This burden <span class='add'>concerneth</span> the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel that <span class='add'>are</span> among them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_11">11&#160;</span> Say, I <span class='add'>am</span> your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done unto them: they shall remove <span class='add'>and</span> go into captivity.
<span class="verse" id="EK12_12">12&#160;</span> And the prince that <span class='add'>is</span> among them shall bear upon <span class='add'>his</span> shoulder in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the ground with <span class='add'>his</span> eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_13">13&#160;</span> My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare: and I will bring him to Babylon <span class='add'>to</span> the land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_14">14&#160;</span> And I will scatter toward every wind all that <span class='add'>are</span> about him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_15">15&#160;</span> And they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_16">16&#160;</span> But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their abominations among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK12_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_18">18&#160;</span> Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness; 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_19">19&#160;</span> And say unto the people of the land, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, <span class='add'>and</span> of the land of Israel; They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.
<span class="verse" id="EK12_20">20&#160;</span> And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK12_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_22">22&#160;</span> Son of man, what <span class='add'>is</span> that proverb <span class='add'>that</span> ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth? 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_23">23&#160;</span> Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every vision. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_24">24&#160;</span> For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_25">25&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, O rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK12_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_27">27&#160;</span> Son of man, behold, <span class='add'>they of</span> the house of Israel say, The vision that he seeth <span class='add'>is</span> for many days <span class='add'>to come</span>, and he prophesieth of the times <span class='add'>that are</span> far off. 
<span class="verse" id="EK12_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; There shall none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shall be done, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK13_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>;
<span class="verse" id="EK13_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!
<span class="verse" id="EK13_4">4&#160;</span> O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_5">5&#160;</span> Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK13_6">6&#160;</span> They have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not sent them: and they have made <span class='add'>others</span> to hope that they would confirm the word. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_7">7&#160;</span> Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saith <span class='add'>it;</span> albeit I have not spoken? 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against you, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_9">9&#160;</span> And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK13_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and <span class='add'>there was</span> no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered <span class='add'>morter:</span>
<span class="verse" id="EK13_11">11&#160;</span> Say unto them which daub <span class='add'>it</span> with untempered <span class='add'>morter</span>, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall rend <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_12">12&#160;</span> Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the daubing wherewith ye have daubed <span class='add'>it</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will even rend <span class='add'>it</span> with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in <span class='add'>my</span> fury to consume <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_14">14&#160;</span> So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered <span class='add'>morter</span>, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_15">15&#160;</span> Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered <span class='add'>morter</span>, and will say unto you, The wall <span class='add'>is</span> no <span class='add'>more</span>, neither they that daubed it; 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>To wit</span>, the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see visions of peace for her, and <span class='add'>there is</span> no peace, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK13_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them, 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_18">18&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Woe to the <span class='add'>women</span> that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and will ye save the souls alive <span class='add'>that come</span> unto you?
<span class="verse" id="EK13_19">19&#160;</span> And will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear <span class='add'>your</span> lies? 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_20">20&#160;</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make <span class='add'>them</span> fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, <span class='add'>even</span> the souls that ye hunt to make <span class='add'>them</span> fly.
<span class="verse" id="EK13_21">21&#160;</span> Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK13_22">22&#160;</span> Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life:
<span class="verse" id="EK13_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_1">1&#160;</span> Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_2">2&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_3">3&#160;</span> Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should I be enquired of at all by them? 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Every man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols; 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_5">5&#160;</span> That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their idols. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Repent, and turn <span class='add'>yourselves</span> from your idols; and turn away your faces from all your abominations.
<span class="verse" id="EK14_7">7&#160;</span> For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet to enquire of him concerning me; I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will answer him by myself: 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_8">8&#160;</span> And I will set my face against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_9">9&#160;</span> And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_10">10&#160;</span> And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeketh <span class='add'>unto him;</span> 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_11">11&#160;</span> That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_12">12&#160;</span>¶ The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_13">13&#160;</span> Son of man, when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast from it: 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_14">14&#160;</span> Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver <span class='add'>but</span> their own souls by their righteousness, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_15">15&#160;</span>¶ If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because of the beasts:
<span class="verse" id="EK14_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Though</span> these three men <span class='add'>were</span> in it, <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Or <span class='add'>if</span> I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off man and beast from it: 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_18">18&#160;</span> Though these three men <span class='add'>were</span> in it, <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Or <span class='add'>if</span> I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_20">20&#160;</span> Though Noah, Daniel, and Job, <span class='add'>were</span> in it, <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall <span class='add'>but</span> deliver their own souls by their righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_21">21&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; How much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK14_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, <span class='add'>both</span> sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, <span class='add'>even</span> concerning all that I have brought upon it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK14_23">23&#160;</span> And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings: and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK15_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK15_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, What is the vine tree more than any tree, <span class='add'>or than</span> a branch which is among the trees of the forest? 
<span class="verse" id="EK15_3">3&#160;</span> Shall wood be taken thereof to do any work? or will <span class='add'>men</span> take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon? 
<span class="verse" id="EK15_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for <span class='add'>any</span> work?
<span class="verse" id="EK15_5">5&#160;</span> Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how much less shall it be meet yet for <span class='add'>any</span> work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is burned?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK15_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="EK15_7">7&#160;</span> And I will set my face against them; they shall go out from <span class='add'>one</span> fire, and <span class='add'>another</span> fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I set my face against them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK15_8">8&#160;</span> And I will make the land desolate, because they have committed a trespass, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK16_1">1&#160;</span> Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_3">3&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity <span class='add'>is</span> of the land of Canaan; thy father <span class='add'>was</span> an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_4">4&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple <span class='add'>thee;</span> thou wast not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_5">5&#160;</span> None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK16_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee <span class='add'>when thou wast</span> in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee <span class='add'>when thou wast</span> in thy blood, Live.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_7">7&#160;</span> I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent ornaments: <span class='add'>thy</span> breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou <span class='add'>wast</span> naked and bare.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_8">8&#160;</span> Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time <span class='add'>was</span> the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, and thou becamest mine. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_9">9&#160;</span> Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_10">10&#160;</span> I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with badgers’ skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered thee with silk. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_11">11&#160;</span> I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_12">12&#160;</span> And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_13">13&#160;</span> Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment <span class='add'>was of</span> fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_14">14&#160;</span> And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it <span class='add'>was</span> perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK16_15">15&#160;</span>¶ But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that passed by; his it was. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_16">16&#160;</span> And of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: <span class='add'>the like things</span> shall not come, neither shall it be <span class='add'>so</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_17">17&#160;</span> Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst commit whoredom with them,
<span class="verse" id="EK16_18">18&#160;</span> And tookest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_19">19&#160;</span> My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey, <span class='add'>wherewith</span> I fed thee, thou hast even set it before them for a sweet savour: and <span class='add'>thus</span> it was, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_20">20&#160;</span> Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. <span class='add'>Is this</span> of thy whoredoms a small matter,
<span class="verse" id="EK16_21">21&#160;</span> That thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass through <span class='add'>the fire</span> for them? 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_22">22&#160;</span> And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, <span class='add'>and</span> wast polluted in thy blood. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_23">23&#160;</span> And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto thee! saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>;) 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> thou hast also built unto thee an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_25">25&#160;</span> Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_26">26&#160;</span> Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_27">27&#160;</span> Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have diminished thine ordinary <span class='add'>food</span>, and delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, which are ashamed of thy lewd way.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_28">28&#160;</span> Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_29">29&#160;</span> Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied herewith. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_30">30&#160;</span> How weak is thine heart, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, seeing thou doest all these <span class='add'>things</span>, the work of an imperious whorish woman; 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_31">31&#160;</span> In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an harlot, in that thou scornest hire;
<span class="verse" id="EK16_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But as</span> a wife that committeth adultery, <span class='add'>which</span> taketh strangers instead of her husband! 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_33">33&#160;</span> They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every side for thy whoredom.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_34">34&#160;</span> And the contrary is in thee from <span class='add'>other</span> women in thy whoredoms, whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art contrary. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK16_35">35&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_36">36&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy children, which thou didst give unto them; 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_37">37&#160;</span> Behold, therefore I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all <span class='add'>them</span> that thou hast loved, with all <span class='add'>them</span> that thou hast hated; I will even gather them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that they may see all thy nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_38">38&#160;</span> And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_39">39&#160;</span> And I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high places: they shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels, and leave thee naked and bare.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_40">40&#160;</span> They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_41">41&#160;</span> And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any more. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_42">42&#160;</span> So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_43">43&#160;</span> Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast fretted me in all these <span class='add'>things;</span> behold, therefore I also will recompense thy way upon <span class='add'>thine</span> head, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: and thou shalt not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK16_44">44&#160;</span>¶ Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use <span class='add'>this</span> proverb against thee, saying, As <span class='add'>is</span> the mother, <span class='add'>so is</span> her daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_45">45&#160;</span>Thou <span class='add'>art</span> thy mother’s daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou <span class='add'>art</span> the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother <span class='add'>was</span> an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_46">46&#160;</span> And thine elder sister <span class='add'>is</span> Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy right hand, <span class='add'>is</span> Sodom and her daughters.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_47">47&#160;</span> Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as <span class='add'>if that were</span> a very little <span class='add'>thing</span>, thou wast corrupted more than they in all thy ways.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_49">49&#160;</span> Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_50">50&#160;</span> And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw <span class='add'>good</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_51">51&#160;</span> Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_52">52&#160;</span> Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_53">53&#160;</span> When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then <span class='add'>will I bring again</span> the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them: 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_54">54&#160;</span> That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_55">55&#160;</span> When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_56">56&#160;</span> For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,
<span class="verse" id="EK16_57">57&#160;</span> Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the time of <span class='add'>thy</span> reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all <span class='add'>that are</span> round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round about.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_58">58&#160;</span> Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK16_59">59&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will even deal with thee as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK16_60">60&#160;</span>¶ Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_61">61&#160;</span> Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I will give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_62">62&#160;</span> And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="EK16_63">63&#160;</span> That thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK17_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_3">3&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; A great eagle with great wings, longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar:
<span class="verse" id="EK17_4">4&#160;</span> He cropped off the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he set it in a city of merchants. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_5">5&#160;</span> He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed <span class='add'>it</span> by great waters, <span class='add'>and</span> set it <span class='add'>as</span> a willow tree.
<span class="verse" id="EK17_6">6&#160;</span> And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_7">7&#160;</span> There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_8">8&#160;</span> It was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.
<span class="verse" id="EK17_9">9&#160;</span> Say thou, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Shall it prosper? shall he not pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_10">10&#160;</span>Yea, behold, <span class='add'>being</span> planted, shall it prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the furrows where it grew. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK17_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_12">12&#160;</span> Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these <span class='add'>things mean</span>? tell <span class='add'>them</span>, Behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and hath taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them with him to Babylon; 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_13">13&#160;</span> And hath taken of the king’s seed, and made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty of the land:
<span class="verse" id="EK17_14">14&#160;</span> That the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up, <span class='add'>but</span> that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.
<span class="verse" id="EK17_15">15&#160;</span> But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such <span class='add'>things</span>? or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered? 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, surely in the place <span class='add'>where</span> the king <span class='add'>dwelleth</span> that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, <span class='add'>even</span> with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_17">17&#160;</span> Neither shall Pharaoh with <span class='add'>his</span> mighty army and great company make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut off many persons: 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_18">18&#160;</span> Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these <span class='add'>things</span>, he shall not escape. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; <span class='add'>As</span> I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_20">20&#160;</span> And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_21">21&#160;</span> And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds: and ye shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK17_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set <span class='add'>it;</span> I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and will plant <span class='add'>it</span> upon an high mountain and eminent: 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_23">23&#160;</span> In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell. 
<span class="verse" id="EK17_24">24&#160;</span> And all the trees of the field shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken and have done <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me again, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_2">2&#160;</span> What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge? 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, ye shall not have <span class='add'>occasion</span> any more to use this proverb in Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_5">5&#160;</span>¶ But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right,
<span class="verse" id="EK18_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbour’s wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_7">7&#160;</span> And hath not oppressed any, <span class='add'>but</span> hath restored to the debtor his pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment; 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_8">8&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>that</span> hath not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase, <span class='add'>that</span> hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between man and man, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_9">9&#160;</span> Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my judgments, to deal truly; he <span class='add'>is</span> just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_10">10&#160;</span>¶ If he beget a son <span class='add'>that is</span> a robber, a shedder of blood, and <span class='add'>that</span> doeth the like to <span class='add'>any</span> one of these <span class='add'>things</span>,
<span class="verse" id="EK18_11">11&#160;</span> And that doeth not any of those <span class='add'>duties</span>, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour’s wife, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_12">12&#160;</span> Hath oppressed the poor and needy, hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_13">13&#160;</span> Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then live? he shall not live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be upon him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Now, lo, <span class='add'>if</span> he beget a son, that seeth all his father’s sins which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour’s wife, 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_16">16&#160;</span> Neither hath oppressed any, hath not withholden the pledge, neither hath spoiled by violence, <span class='add'>but</span> hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment,
<span class="verse" id="EK18_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> hath taken off his hand from the poor, <span class='add'>that</span> hath not received usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments, hath walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his father, he shall surely live. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As for</span> his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> not good among his people, lo, even he shall die in his iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, <span class='add'>and</span> hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_20">20&#160;</span> The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_21">21&#160;</span> But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_22">22&#160;</span> All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_23">23&#160;</span> Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: <span class='add'>and</span> not that he should return from his ways, and live? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_24">24&#160;</span>¶ But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, <span class='add'>and</span> doeth according to all the abominations that the wicked <span class='add'>man</span> doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal? 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_26">26&#160;</span> When a righteous <span class='add'>man</span> turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for his iniquity that he hath done shall he die. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_27">27&#160;</span> Again, when the wicked <span class='add'>man</span> turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_28">28&#160;</span> Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall not die. 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_29">29&#160;</span> Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. Repent, and turn <span class='add'>yourselves</span> from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK18_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O house of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="EK18_32">32&#160;</span> For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: wherefore turn <span class='add'>yourselves</span>, and live ye.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK19_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_2">2&#160;</span> And say, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young lions. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_3">3&#160;</span> And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey; it devoured men. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_4">4&#160;</span> The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit, and they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_5">5&#160;</span> Now when she saw that she had waited, <span class='add'>and</span> her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, <span class='add'>and</span> made him a young lion. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_6">6&#160;</span> And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey, <span class='add'>and</span> devoured men. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_7">7&#160;</span> And he knew their desolate palaces, and he laid waste their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, by the noise of his roaring.
<span class="verse" id="EK19_8">8&#160;</span> Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_9">9&#160;</span> And they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon: they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK19_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Thy mother <span class='add'>is</span> like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters: she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.
<span class="verse" id="EK19_11">11&#160;</span> And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her branches. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_12">12&#160;</span> But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_13">13&#160;</span>And now she <span class='add'>is</span> planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground. 
<span class="verse" id="EK19_14">14&#160;</span> And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, <span class='add'>which</span> hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod <span class='add'>to be</span> a sceptre to rule. This <span class='add'>is</span> a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK20_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth <span class='add'>month</span>, the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> certain of the elders of Israel came to enquire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and sat before me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_2">2&#160;</span> Then came the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_3">3&#160;</span> Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Are ye come to enquire of me? <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, I will not be enquired of by you. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_4">4&#160;</span> Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge <span class='add'>them</span>? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers:</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK20_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto them, saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God;
<span class="verse" id="EK20_6">6&#160;</span> In the day <span class='add'>that</span> I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which <span class='add'>is</span> the glory of all lands: 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_7">7&#160;</span> Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_8">8&#160;</span> But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_9">9&#160;</span> But I wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen, among whom they <span class='add'>were</span>, in whose sight I made myself known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK20_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_11">11&#160;</span> And I gave them my statutes, and shewed them my judgments, which <span class='add'>if</span> a man do, he shall even live in them.
<span class="verse" id="EK20_12">12&#160;</span> Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that sanctify them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_13">13&#160;</span> But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness: they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which <span class='add'>if</span> a man do, he shall even live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly polluted: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness, to consume them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_14">14&#160;</span> But I wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_15">15&#160;</span> Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given <span class='add'>them</span>, flowing with milk and honey, which <span class='add'>is</span> the glory of all lands; 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_16">16&#160;</span> Because they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes, but polluted my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_17">17&#160;</span> Nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_18">18&#160;</span> But I said unto their children in the wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols: 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_19">19&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God; walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_20">20&#160;</span> And hallow my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_21">21&#160;</span> Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which <span class='add'>if</span> a man do, he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_22">22&#160;</span> Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_23">23&#160;</span> I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them through the countries; 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_24">24&#160;</span> Because they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers’ idols. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_25">25&#160;</span> Wherefore I gave them also statutes <span class='add'>that were</span> not good, and judgments whereby they should not live; 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_26">26&#160;</span> And I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through <span class='add'>the fire</span> all that openeth the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK20_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Yet in this your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.
<span class="verse" id="EK20_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='add'>For</span> when I had brought them into the land, <span class='add'>for</span> the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering: there also they made their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_29">29&#160;</span> Then I said unto them, What <span class='add'>is</span> the high place whereunto ye go? And the name thereof is called Bamah unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="EK20_30">30&#160;</span> Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye whoredom after their abominations? 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_31">31&#160;</span> For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be enquired of by you, O house of Israel? <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, I will not be enquired of by you. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_32">32&#160;</span> And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK20_33">33&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over you: 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_34">34&#160;</span> And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_35">35&#160;</span> And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and there will I plead with you face to face. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_36">36&#160;</span> Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_37">37&#160;</span> And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant:
<span class="verse" id="EK20_38">38&#160;</span> And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_39">39&#160;</span> As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter <span class='add'>also</span>, if ye will not hearken unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your idols. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_40">40&#160;</span> For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the land, serve me: there will I accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.
<span class="verse" id="EK20_41">41&#160;</span> I will accept you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in you before the heathen.
<span class="verse" id="EK20_42">42&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country <span class='add'>for</span> the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_43">43&#160;</span> And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_44">44&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I have wrought with you for my name’s sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK20_45">45&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_46">46&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop <span class='add'>thy word</span> toward the south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field; 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_47">47&#160;</span> And say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall be burned therein. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_48">48&#160;</span> And all flesh shall see that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have kindled it: it shall not be quenched. 
<span class="verse" id="EK20_49">49&#160;</span> Then said I, Ah Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! they say of me, Doth he not speak parables?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK21_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop <span class='add'>thy word</span> toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_3">3&#160;</span> And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_4">4&#160;</span> Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of his sheath against all flesh from the south to the north: 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_5">5&#160;</span> That all flesh may know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have drawn forth my sword out of his sheath: it shall not return any more. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_6">6&#160;</span> Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of <span class='add'>thy</span> loins; and with bitterness sigh before their eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_7">7&#160;</span> And it shall be, when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak <span class='add'>as</span> water: behold, it cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK21_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_9">9&#160;</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished: 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_10">10&#160;</span> It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, <span class='add'>as</span> every tree.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_11">11&#160;</span> And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand of the slayer. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_12">12&#160;</span> Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon all the princes of Israel: terrors by reason of the sword shall be upon my people: smite therefore upon <span class='add'>thy</span> thigh.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_13">13&#160;</span>Because <span class='add'>it is</span> a trial, and what if <span class='add'>the sword</span> contemn even the rod? it shall be no <span class='add'>more</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_14">14&#160;</span> Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite <span class='add'>thine</span> hands together, and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the slain: it <span class='add'>is</span> the sword of the great <span class='add'>men that are</span> slain, which entereth into their privy chambers.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_15">15&#160;</span> I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that <span class='add'>their</span> heart may faint, and <span class='add'>their</span> ruins be multiplied: ah! <span class='add'>it is</span> made bright, <span class='add'>it is</span> wrapped up for the slaughter.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_16">16&#160;</span> Go thee one way or other, <span class='add'>either</span> on the right hand, <span class='add'>or</span> on the left, whithersoever thy face <span class='add'>is</span> set.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_17">17&#160;</span> I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury to rest: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have said <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK21_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me again, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_19">19&#160;</span> Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come: both twain shall come forth out of one land: and choose thou a place, choose <span class='add'>it</span> at the head of the way to the city. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_20">20&#160;</span> Appoint a way, that the sword may come to Rabbath of the Ammonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_21">21&#160;</span> For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he made <span class='add'>his</span> arrows bright, he consulted with images, he looked in the liver.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_22">22&#160;</span> At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint <span class='add'>battering</span> rams against the gates, to cast a mount, <span class='add'>and</span> to build a fort.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_23">23&#160;</span> And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight, to them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_24">24&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because, <span class='add'>I say</span>, that ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK21_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity <span class='add'>shall have</span> an end, 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_26">26&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Remove the diadem, and take off the crown: this <span class='add'>shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> the same: exalt <span class='add'>him that is</span> low, and abase <span class='add'>him that is</span> high. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_27">27&#160;</span> I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no <span class='add'>more</span>, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it <span class='add'>him</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK21_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And thou, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say thou, The sword, the sword <span class='add'>is</span> drawn: for the slaughter <span class='add'>it is</span> furbished, to consume because of the glittering: 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_29">29&#160;</span> Whiles they see vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee upon the necks of <span class='add'>them that are</span> slain, of the wicked, whose day is come, when their iniquity <span class='add'>shall have</span> an end. 
<span class="verse" id="EK21_30">30&#160;</span>Shall I cause <span class='add'>it</span> to return into his sheath? I will judge thee in the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_31">31&#160;</span> And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, <span class='add'>and</span> skilful to destroy.
<span class="verse" id="EK21_32">32&#160;</span> Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no <span class='add'>more</span> remembered: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK22_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_2">2&#160;</span> Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city? yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_3">3&#160;</span> Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, The city sheddeth blood in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against herself to defile herself. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_4">4&#160;</span> Thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed; and hast defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come <span class='add'>even</span> unto thy years: therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking to all countries. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Those that be</span> near, and <span class='add'>those that be</span> far from thee, shall mock thee, <span class='add'>which art</span> infamous <span class='add'>and</span> much vexed.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_6">6&#160;</span> Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their power to shed blood.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_7">7&#160;</span> In thee have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger: in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_8">8&#160;</span> Thou hast despised mine holy things, and hast profaned my sabbaths. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_9">9&#160;</span> In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood: and in thee they eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_10">10&#160;</span> In thee have they discovered their fathers’ nakedness: in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_11">11&#160;</span> And one hath committed abomination with his neighbour’s wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in thee hath humbled his sister, his father’s daughter.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_12">12&#160;</span> In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK22_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Behold, therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_14">14&#160;</span> Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, and will do <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_15">15&#160;</span> And I will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in the countries, and will consume thy filthiness out of thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of the heathen, and thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK22_17">17&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_18">18&#160;</span> Son of man, the house of Israel is to me become dross: all they <span class='add'>are</span> brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are <span class='add'>even</span> the dross of silver.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because ye are all become dross, behold, therefore I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt <span class='add'>it;</span> so will I gather <span class='add'>you</span> in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave <span class='add'>you there</span>, and melt you.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_21">21&#160;</span> Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_22">22&#160;</span> As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have poured out my fury upon you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK22_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_24">24&#160;</span> Son of man, say unto her, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her many widows in the midst thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_26">26&#160;</span> Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane, neither have they shewed <span class='add'>difference</span> between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_27">27&#160;</span> Her princes in the midst thereof <span class='add'>are</span> like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, <span class='add'>and</span> to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_28">28&#160;</span> And her prophets have daubed them with untempered <span class='add'>morter</span>, seeing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath not spoken. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_29">29&#160;</span> The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully.
<span class="verse" id="EK22_30">30&#160;</span> And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none. 
<span class="verse" id="EK22_31">31&#160;</span> Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK23_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother: 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_3">3&#160;</span> And they committed whoredoms in Egypt; they committed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginity. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_4">4&#160;</span> And the names of them <span class='add'>were</span> Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. Thus <span class='add'>were</span> their names; Samaria <span class='add'>is</span> Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_5">5&#160;</span> And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians <span class='add'>her</span> neighbours, 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Which were</span> clothed with blue, captains and rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_7">7&#160;</span> Thus she committed her whoredoms with them, with all them <span class='add'>that were</span> the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted: with all their idols she defiled herself.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_8">8&#160;</span> Neither left she her whoredoms <span class='add'>brought</span> from Egypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and poured their whoredom upon her. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_9">9&#160;</span> Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_10">10&#160;</span> These discovered her nakedness: they took her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among women; for they had executed judgment upon her.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK23_11">11&#160;</span> And when her sister Aholibah saw <span class='add'>this</span>, she was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister in <span class='add'>her</span> whoredoms.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_12">12&#160;</span> She doted upon the Assyrians <span class='add'>her</span> neighbours, captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_13">13&#160;</span> Then I saw that she was defiled, <span class='add'>that</span> they <span class='add'>took</span> both one way, 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_14">14&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion, 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_15">15&#160;</span> Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads, all of them princes to look to, after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativity: 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_16">16&#160;</span> And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_17">17&#160;</span> And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and her mind was alienated from them.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_18">18&#160;</span> So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedness: then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated from her sister. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_19">19&#160;</span> Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_20">20&#160;</span> For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh <span class='add'>is as</span> the flesh of asses, and whose issue <span class='add'>is like</span> the issue of horses. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_21">21&#160;</span> Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK23_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and I will bring them against thee on every side; 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_23">23&#160;</span> The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, <span class='add'>and</span> all the Assyrians with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_24">24&#160;</span> And they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and wheels, and with an assembly of people, <span class='add'>which</span> shall set against thee buckler and shield and helmet round about: and I will set judgment before them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_25">25&#160;</span> And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal furiously with thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_26">26&#160;</span> They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_27">27&#160;</span> Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom <span class='add'>brought</span> from the land of Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_28">28&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand <span class='add'>of them</span> whom thou hatest, into the hand <span class='add'>of them</span> from whom thy mind is alienated: 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_29">29&#160;</span> And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare: and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_30">30&#160;</span> I will do these <span class='add'>things</span> unto thee, because thou hast gone a whoring after the heathen, <span class='add'>and</span> because thou art polluted with their idols. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_31">31&#160;</span> Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore will I give her cup into thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_32">32&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Thou shalt drink of thy sister’s cup deep and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_33">33&#160;</span> Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_34">34&#160;</span> Thou shalt even drink it and suck <span class='add'>it</span> out, and thou shalt break the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_35">35&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thou hast forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy whoredoms. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK23_36">36&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said moreover unto me; Son of man, wilt thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations;
<span class="verse" id="EK23_37">37&#160;</span> That they have committed adultery, and blood <span class='add'>is</span> in their hands, and with their idols have they committed adultery, and have also caused their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through <span class='add'>the fire</span>, to devour <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_38">38&#160;</span> Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_39">39&#160;</span> For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of mine house. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_40">40&#160;</span> And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a messenger <span class='add'>was</span> sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments,
<span class="verse" id="EK23_41">41&#160;</span> And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_42">42&#160;</span> And a voice of a multitude being at ease <span class='add'>was</span> with her: and with the men of the common sort <span class='add'>were</span> brought Sabeans from the wilderness, which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_43">43&#160;</span> Then said I unto <span class='add'>her that was</span> old in adulteries, Will they now commit whoredoms with her, and she <span class='add'>with them</span>?
<span class="verse" id="EK23_44">44&#160;</span> Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK23_45">45&#160;</span>¶ And the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because they <span class='add'>are</span> adulteresses, and blood <span class='add'>is</span> in their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_46">46&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will bring up a company upon them, and will give them to be removed and spoiled.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_47">47&#160;</span> And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.
<span class="verse" id="EK23_48">48&#160;</span> Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK23_49">49&#160;</span> And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK24_1">1&#160;</span> Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, write thee the name of the day, <span class='add'>even</span> of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_3">3&#160;</span> And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Set on a pot, set <span class='add'>it</span> on, and also pour water into it: 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_4">4&#160;</span> Gather the pieces thereof into it, <span class='add'>even</span> every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill <span class='add'>it</span> with the choice bones. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_5">5&#160;</span> Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it, <span class='add'>and</span> make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK24_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Woe to the bloody city, to the pot whose scum <span class='add'>is</span> therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_7">7&#160;</span> For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_8">8&#160;</span> That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Woe to the bloody city! I will even make the pile for fire great. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_10">10&#160;</span> Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burned. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_11">11&#160;</span> Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn, and <span class='add'>that</span> the filthiness of it may be molten in it, <span class='add'>that</span> the scum of it may be consumed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_12">12&#160;</span> She hath wearied <span class='add'>herself</span> with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her: her scum <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_13">13&#160;</span> In thy filthiness <span class='add'>is</span> lewdness: because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_14">14&#160;</span> I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it:</span> it shall come to pass, and I will do <span class='add'>it;</span> I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge thee, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK24_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Also the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_16">16&#160;</span> Son of man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears run down.
<span class="verse" id="EK24_17">17&#160;</span> Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover not <span class='add'>thy</span> lips, and eat not the bread of men.
<span class="verse" id="EK24_18">18&#160;</span> So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK24_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not tell us what these <span class='add'>things are</span> to us, that thou doest <span class='add'>so</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_20">20&#160;</span> Then I answered them, The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_21">21&#160;</span> Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword.
<span class="verse" id="EK24_22">22&#160;</span> And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover <span class='add'>your</span> lips, nor eat the bread of men. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_23">23&#160;</span> And your tires <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward another. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_24">24&#160;</span> Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_25">25&#160;</span> Also, thou son of man, <span class='add'>shall it</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their daughters,
<span class="verse" id="EK24_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> he that escapeth in that day shall come unto thee, to cause <span class='add'>thee</span> to hear <span class='add'>it</span> with <span class='add'>thine</span> ears? 
<span class="verse" id="EK24_27">27&#160;</span> In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK25_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK25_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them; 
<span class="verse" id="EK25_3">3&#160;</span> And say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate; and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity; 
<span class="verse" id="EK25_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.
<span class="verse" id="EK25_5">5&#160;</span> And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a couchingplace for flocks: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK25_6">6&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thou hast clapped <span class='add'>thine</span> hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the land of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="EK25_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, therefore I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK25_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah <span class='add'>is</span> like unto all the heathen; 
<span class="verse" id="EK25_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities <span class='add'>which are</span> on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim,
<span class="verse" id="EK25_10">10&#160;</span> Unto the men of the east with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.
<span class="verse" id="EK25_11">11&#160;</span> And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK25_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them;
<span class="verse" id="EK25_13">13&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.
<span class="verse" id="EK25_14">14&#160;</span> And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK25_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy <span class='add'>it</span> for the old hatred;
<span class="verse" id="EK25_16">16&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.
<span class="verse" id="EK25_17">17&#160;</span> And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I shall lay my vengeance upon them.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK26_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken <span class='add'>that was</span> the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I shall be replenished, <span class='add'>now</span> she is laid waste: 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come up. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_4">4&#160;</span> And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_5">5&#160;</span>It shall be <span class='add'>a place for</span> the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: and it shall become a spoil to the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_6">6&#160;</span> And her daughters which <span class='add'>are</span> in the field shall be slain by the sword; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK26_7">7&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much people. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_8">8&#160;</span> He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and lift up the buckler against thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK26_9">9&#160;</span> And he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_10">10&#160;</span> By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.
<span class="verse" id="EK26_11">11&#160;</span> With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy streets: he shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong garrisons shall go down to the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_12">12&#160;</span> And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the water.
<span class="verse" id="EK26_13">13&#160;</span> And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound of thy harps shall be no more heard. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_14">14&#160;</span> And I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be <span class='add'>a place</span> to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK26_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> to Tyrus; Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee? 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_16">16&#160;</span> Then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put off their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at <span class='add'>every</span> moment, and be astonished at thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK26_17">17&#160;</span> And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee, How art thou destroyed, <span class='add'>that wast</span> inhabited of seafaring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, which cause their terror <span class='add'>to be</span> on all that haunt it!
<span class="verse" id="EK26_18">18&#160;</span> Now shall the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that <span class='add'>are</span> in the sea shall be troubled at thy departure. 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_19">19&#160;</span> For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee; 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_20">20&#160;</span> When I shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land of the living; 
<span class="verse" id="EK26_21">21&#160;</span> I will make thee a terror, and thou <span class='add'>shalt be</span> no <span class='add'>more:</span> though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK27_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_2">2&#160;</span> Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus; 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_3">3&#160;</span> And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, <span class='add'>which art</span> a merchant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; O Tyrus, thou hast said, I <span class='add'>am</span> of perfect beauty.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_4">4&#160;</span> Thy borders <span class='add'>are</span> in the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_5">5&#160;</span> They have made all thy <span class='add'>ship</span> boards of fir trees of Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Of</span> the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches <span class='add'>of</span> ivory, <span class='add'>brought</span> out of the isles of Chittim.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_7">7&#160;</span> Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was that which covered thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_8">8&#160;</span> The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise <span class='add'>men</span>, O Tyrus, <span class='add'>that</span> were in thee, were thy pilots. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_9">9&#160;</span> The ancients of Gebal and the wise <span class='add'>men</span> thereof were in thee thy calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to occupy thy merchandise.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_10">10&#160;</span> They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth thy comeliness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_11">11&#160;</span> The men of Arvad with thine army <span class='add'>were</span> upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_12">12&#160;</span> Tarshish <span class='add'>was</span> thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all <span class='add'>kind of</span> riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_13">13&#160;</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they <span class='add'>were</span> thy merchants: they traded the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_14">14&#160;</span> They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses and horsemen and mules. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_15">15&#160;</span> The men of Dedan <span class='add'>were</span> thy merchants; many isles <span class='add'>were</span> the merchandise of thine hand: they brought thee <span class='add'>for</span> a present horns of ivory and ebony. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_16">16&#160;</span> Syria <span class='add'>was</span> thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_17">17&#160;</span> Judah, and the land of Israel, they <span class='add'>were</span> thy merchants: they traded in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_18">18&#160;</span> Damascus <span class='add'>was</span> thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and white wool. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_19">19&#160;</span> Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs: bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_20">20&#160;</span> Dedan <span class='add'>was</span> thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_21">21&#160;</span> Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee in lambs, and rams, and goats: in these <span class='add'>were they</span> thy merchants.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_22">22&#160;</span> The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they <span class='add'>were</span> thy merchants: they occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_23">23&#160;</span> Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, <span class='add'>and</span> Chilmad, <span class='add'>were</span> thy merchants. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_24">24&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>were</span> thy merchants in all sorts <span class='add'>of things</span>, in blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_25">25&#160;</span> The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market: and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK27_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_27">27&#160;</span> Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, that <span class='add'>are</span> in thee, and in all thy company which <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_28">28&#160;</span> The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.
<span class="verse" id="EK27_29">29&#160;</span> And all that handle the oar, the mariners, <span class='add'>and</span> all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the land; 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_30">30&#160;</span> And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they shall wallow themselves in the ashes: 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_31">31&#160;</span> And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart <span class='add'>and</span> bitter wailing. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_32">32&#160;</span> And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, <span class='add'>saying</span>, What <span class='add'>city is</span> like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea? 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_33">33&#160;</span> When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_34">34&#160;</span> In the time <span class='add'>when</span> thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee shall fall. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_35">35&#160;</span> All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee, and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in <span class='add'>their</span> countenance. 
<span class="verse" id="EK27_36">36&#160;</span> The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be a terror, and never <span class='add'>shalt be</span> any more.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK28_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thine heart <span class='add'>is</span> lifted up, and thou hast said, I <span class='add'>am</span> a God, I sit <span class='add'>in</span> the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou <span class='add'>art</span> a man, and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God:
<span class="verse" id="EK28_3">3&#160;</span>Behold, thou <span class='add'>art</span> wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee: 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_4">4&#160;</span> With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures: 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_5">5&#160;</span> By thy great wisdom <span class='add'>and</span> by thy traffick hast thou increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches:
<span class="verse" id="EK28_6">6&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of God; 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_7">7&#160;</span> Behold, therefore I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_8">8&#160;</span> They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the deaths of <span class='add'>them that are</span> slain in the midst of the seas. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_9">9&#160;</span> Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I <span class='add'>am</span> God? but thou <span class='add'>shalt be</span> a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK28_10">10&#160;</span> Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK28_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_12">12&#160;</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_13">13&#160;</span> Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone <span class='add'>was</span> thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created.
<span class="verse" id="EK28_14">14&#160;</span>Thou <span class='add'>art</span> the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee <span class='add'>so:</span> thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_15">15&#160;</span>Thou <span class='add'>wast</span> perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_16">16&#160;</span> By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_17">17&#160;</span> Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_18">18&#160;</span> Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that behold thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_19">19&#160;</span> All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never <span class='add'>shalt</span> thou <span class='add'>be</span> any more.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK28_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_21">21&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it, 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_22">22&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, O Zidon; and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_23">23&#160;</span> For I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets; and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon her on every side; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK28_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor <span class='add'>any</span> grieving thorn of all <span class='add'>that are</span> round about them, that despised them; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_25">25&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob. 
<span class="verse" id="EK28_26">26&#160;</span> And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK29_1">1&#160;</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth <span class='add'>month</span>, in the twelfth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt: 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_3">3&#160;</span> Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river <span class='add'>is</span> mine own, and I have made <span class='add'>it</span> for myself. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_4">4&#160;</span> But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick unto thy scales. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_5">5&#160;</span> And I will leave thee <span class='add'>thrown</span> into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.
<span class="verse" id="EK29_6">6&#160;</span> And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_7">7&#160;</span> When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and madest all their loins to be at a stand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK29_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_9">9&#160;</span> And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: because he hath said, The river <span class='add'>is</span> mine, and I have made <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, therefore I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, and against thy rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste <span class='add'>and</span> desolate, from the tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.
<span class="verse" id="EK29_11">11&#160;</span> No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_12">12&#160;</span> And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the countries <span class='add'>that are</span> desolate, and her cities among the cities <span class='add'>that are</span> laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK29_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Yet thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; At the end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were scattered: 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_14">14&#160;</span> And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return <span class='add'>into</span> the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="EK29_15">15&#160;</span> It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt itself any more above the nations: for I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_16">16&#160;</span> And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, which bringeth <span class='add'>their</span> iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look after them: but they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK29_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the first <span class='add'>month</span>, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_18">18&#160;</span> Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head <span class='add'>was</span> made bald, and every shoulder <span class='add'>was</span> peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it: 
<span class="verse" id="EK29_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.
<span class="verse" id="EK29_20">20&#160;</span> I have given him the land of Egypt <span class='add'>for</span> his labour wherewith he served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK29_21">21&#160;</span>¶ In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK30_1">1&#160;</span> The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Howl ye, Woe worth the day! 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_3">3&#160;</span> For the day <span class='add'>is</span> near, even the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> near, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of the heathen. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_4">4&#160;</span> And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_5">5&#160;</span> Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_6">6&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; They also that uphold Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of Syene shall they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_7">7&#160;</span> And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries <span class='add'>that are</span> desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities <span class='add'>that are</span> wasted. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_8">8&#160;</span> And they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and <span class='add'>when</span> all her helpers shall be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_9">9&#160;</span> In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_10">10&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_11">11&#160;</span> He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_12">12&#160;</span> And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand of the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_13">13&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will also destroy the idols, and I will cause <span class='add'>their</span> images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_14">14&#160;</span> And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments in No.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_15">15&#160;</span> And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_16">16&#160;</span> And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have great pain, and No shall be rent asunder, and Noph <span class='add'>shall have</span> distresses daily. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_17">17&#160;</span> The young men of Aven and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword: and these <span class='add'>cities</span> shall go into captivity.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_18">18&#160;</span> At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.
<span class="verse" id="EK30_19">19&#160;</span> Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK30_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first <span class='add'>month</span>, in the seventh <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_21">21&#160;</span> Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_23">23&#160;</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_24">24&#160;</span> And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break Pharaoh’s arms, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded <span class='add'>man</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_25">25&#160;</span> But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EK30_26">26&#160;</span> And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them among the countries; and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK31_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third <span class='add'>month</span>, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK31_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Behold, the Assyrian <span class='add'>was</span> a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs.
<span class="verse" id="EK31_4">4&#160;</span> The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her rivers running round about his plants, and sent out her little rivers unto all the trees of the field.
<span class="verse" id="EK31_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.
<span class="verse" id="EK31_6">6&#160;</span> All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all great nations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_7">7&#160;</span> Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches: for his root was by great waters. 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_8">8&#160;</span> The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees were not like his boughs, and the chesnut trees were not like his branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty. 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_9">9&#160;</span> I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that all the trees of Eden, that <span class='add'>were</span> in the garden of God, envied him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK31_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because thou hast lifted up thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height; 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_11">11&#160;</span> I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shall surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness.
<span class="verse" id="EK31_12">12&#160;</span> And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off, and have left him: upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of the land; and all the people of the earth are gone down from his shadow, and have left him. 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_13">13&#160;</span> Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches: 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_14">14&#160;</span> To the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves for their height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.
<span class="verse" id="EK31_15">15&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; In the day when he went down to the grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him, and I restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field fainted for him.
<span class="verse" id="EK31_16">16&#160;</span> I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="EK31_17">17&#160;</span> They also went down into hell with him unto <span class='add'>them that be</span> slain with the sword; and <span class='add'>they that were</span> his arm, <span class='add'>that</span> dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the heathen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK31_18">18&#160;</span>¶ To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcised with <span class='add'>them that be</span> slain by the sword. This <span class='add'>is</span> Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK32_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou <span class='add'>art</span> as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their rivers.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_3">3&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will therefore spread out my net over thee with a company of many people; and they shall bring thee up in my net. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_4">4&#160;</span> Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to remain upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_5">5&#160;</span> And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys with thy height. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_6">6&#160;</span> I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest, <span class='add'>even</span> to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_7">7&#160;</span> And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give her light.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_8">8&#160;</span> All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_9">9&#160;</span> I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not known.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_10">10&#160;</span> Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at <span class='add'>every</span> moment, every man for his own life, in the day of thy fall. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK32_11">11&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_12">12&#160;</span> By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall, the terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the pomp of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_13">13&#160;</span> I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_14">14&#160;</span> Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_15">15&#160;</span> When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country shall be destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_16">16&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her, <span class='add'>even</span> for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK32_17">17&#160;</span>¶ It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_18">18&#160;</span> Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, <span class='add'>even</span> her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_19">19&#160;</span> Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_20">20&#160;</span> They shall fall in the midst of <span class='add'>them that are</span> slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_21">21&#160;</span> The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_22">22&#160;</span> Asshur <span class='add'>is</span> there and all her company: his graves <span class='add'>are</span> about him: all of them slain, fallen by the sword: 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_23">23&#160;</span> Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is round about her grave: all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the land of the living.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_24">24&#160;</span>There <span class='add'>is</span> Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror in the land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_25">25&#160;</span> They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her multitude: her graves <span class='add'>are</span> round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of <span class='add'>them that be</span> slain. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_26">26&#160;</span>There <span class='add'>is</span> Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves <span class='add'>are</span> round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their terror in the land of the living. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_27">27&#160;</span> And they shall not lie with the mighty <span class='add'>that are</span> fallen of the uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though <span class='add'>they were</span> the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_28">28&#160;</span> Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with <span class='add'>them that are</span> slain with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_29">29&#160;</span>There <span class='add'>is</span> Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their might are laid by <span class='add'>them that were</span> slain by the sword: they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.
<span class="verse" id="EK32_30">30&#160;</span>There <span class='add'>be</span> the princes of the north, all of them, and all the Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with <span class='add'>them that be</span> slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_31">31&#160;</span> Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his multitude, <span class='add'>even</span> Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK32_32">32&#160;</span> For I have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with <span class='add'>them that are</span> slain with the sword, <span class='add'>even</span> Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_1">1&#160;</span> Again the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman:
<span class="verse" id="EK33_3">3&#160;</span> If when he seeth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people; 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_4">4&#160;</span> Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.
<span class="verse" id="EK33_5">5&#160;</span> He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_6">6&#160;</span> But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take <span class='add'>any</span> person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman’s hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_7">7&#160;</span>¶ So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_8">8&#160;</span> When I say unto the wicked, O wicked <span class='add'>man</span>, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked <span class='add'>man</span> shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_9">9&#160;</span> Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_10">10&#160;</span> Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel; Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins <span class='add'>be</span> upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_11">11&#160;</span> Say unto them, <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his <span class='add'>righteousness</span> in the day that he sinneth. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_13">13&#160;</span> When I shall say to the righteous, <span class='add'>that</span> he shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_14">14&#160;</span> Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right;
<span class="verse" id="EK33_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_16">16&#160;</span> None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_18">18&#160;</span> When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_19">19&#160;</span> But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth <span class='add'>month</span>, in the fifth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, <span class='add'>that</span> one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_22">22&#160;</span> Now the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was upon me in the evening, afore he that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_23">23&#160;</span> Then the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_24">24&#160;</span> Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we <span class='add'>are</span> many; the land is given us for inheritance. 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_25">25&#160;</span> Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood: and shall ye possess the land? 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_26">26&#160;</span> Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour’s wife: and shall ye possess the land? 
<span class="verse" id="EK33_27">27&#160;</span> Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; <span class='add'>As</span> I live, surely they that <span class='add'>are</span> in the wastes shall fall by the sword, and him that <span class='add'>is</span> in the open field will I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that <span class='add'>be</span> in the forts and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.
<span class="verse" id="EK33_28">28&#160;</span> For I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, that none shall pass through.
<span class="verse" id="EK33_29">29&#160;</span> Then shall they know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I have laid the land most desolate because of all their abominations which they have committed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK33_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK33_31">31&#160;</span> And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee <span class='add'>as</span> my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, <span class='add'>but</span> their heart goeth after their covetousness.
<span class="verse" id="EK33_32">32&#160;</span>And, lo, thou <span class='add'>art</span> unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do them not.
<span class="verse" id="EK33_33">33&#160;</span> And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall they know that a prophet hath been among them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK34_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> unto the shepherds; Woe <span class='add'>be</span> to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the flocks? 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_3">3&#160;</span> Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them that are fed: <span class='add'>but</span> ye feed not the flock. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_4">4&#160;</span> The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up <span class='add'>that which was</span> broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_5">5&#160;</span> And they were scattered, because <span class='add'>there is</span> no shepherd: and they became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.
<span class="verse" id="EK34_6">6&#160;</span> My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and none did search or seek <span class='add'>after them</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK34_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because <span class='add'>there was</span> no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock;
<span class="verse" id="EK34_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_10">10&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK34_11">11&#160;</span>¶ For thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, will both search my sheep, and seek them out. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_12">12&#160;</span> As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep <span class='add'>that are</span> scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.
<span class="verse" id="EK34_13">13&#160;</span> And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited places of the country. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_14">14&#160;</span> I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and <span class='add'>in</span> a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_15">15&#160;</span> I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_16">16&#160;</span> I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up <span class='add'>that which was</span> broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the strong; I will feed them with judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK34_17">17&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.
<span class="verse" id="EK34_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Seemeth it</span> a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_19">19&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>as for</span> my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK34_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> unto them; Behold, I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_21">21&#160;</span> Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad; 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_23">23&#160;</span> And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, <span class='add'>even</span> my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_24">24&#160;</span> And I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_25">25&#160;</span> And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_26">26&#160;</span> And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season; there shall be showers of blessing. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_27">27&#160;</span> And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served themselves of them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_28">28&#160;</span> And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make <span class='add'>them</span> afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_29">29&#160;</span> And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the heathen any more.
<span class="verse" id="EK34_30">30&#160;</span> Thus shall they know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God <span class='add'>am</span> with them, and <span class='add'>that</span> they, <span class='add'>even</span> the house of Israel, <span class='add'>are</span> my people, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK34_31">31&#160;</span> And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, <span class='add'>are</span> men, <span class='add'>and</span> I <span class='add'>am</span> your God, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK35_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_3">3&#160;</span> And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, O mount Seir, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I will make thee most desolate.
<span class="verse" id="EK35_4">4&#160;</span> I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_5">5&#160;</span> Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed <span class='add'>the blood of</span> the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time <span class='add'>that their</span> iniquity <span class='add'>had</span> an end:
<span class="verse" id="EK35_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore, <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood, even blood shall pursue thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_7">7&#160;</span> Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it him that passeth out and him that returneth.
<span class="verse" id="EK35_8">8&#160;</span> And I will fill his mountains with his slain <span class='add'>men:</span> in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are slain with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_9">9&#160;</span> I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not return: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK35_10">10&#160;</span> Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was there:<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore, <span class='add'>as</span> I live, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, I will even do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make myself known among them, when I have judged thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_12">12&#160;</span> And thou shalt know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and that</span> I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.
<span class="verse" id="EK35_13">13&#160;</span> Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard <span class='add'>them</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK35_14">14&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will make thee desolate. 
<span class="verse" id="EK35_15">15&#160;</span> As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, <span class='add'>even</span> all of it: and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK36_1">1&#160;</span> Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_2">2&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because the enemy hath said against you, Aha, even the ancient high places are ours in possession: 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because they have made <span class='add'>you</span> desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and <span class='add'>are</span> an infamy of the people:
<span class="verse" id="EK36_4">4&#160;</span> Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken, which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that <span class='add'>are</span> round about;
<span class="verse" id="EK36_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen, and against all Idumea, which have appointed my land into their possession with the joy of all <span class='add'>their</span> heart, with despiteful minds, to cast it out for a prey. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_6">6&#160;</span> Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen: 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely the heathen that <span class='add'>are</span> about you, they shall bear their shame. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK36_8">8&#160;</span>¶ But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to come. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_9">9&#160;</span>For, behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall be tilled and sown: 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_10">10&#160;</span> And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, <span class='add'>even</span> all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be builded: 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_11">11&#160;</span> And I will multiply upon you man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better <span class='add'>unto you</span> than at your beginnings: and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_12">12&#160;</span> Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, <span class='add'>even</span> my people Israel; and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them <span class='add'>of men</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_13">13&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Because they say unto you, Thou <span class='add'>land</span> devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations; 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_14">14&#160;</span> Therefore thou shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK36_15">15&#160;</span>Neither will I cause <span class='add'>men</span> to hear in thee the shame of the heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK36_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_17">17&#160;</span> Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their own way and by their doings: their way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_18">18&#160;</span> Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had shed upon the land, and for their idols <span class='add'>wherewith</span> they had polluted it: 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_19">19&#160;</span> And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way and according to their doings I judged them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_20">20&#160;</span> And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These <span class='add'>are</span> the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and are gone forth out of his land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK36_21">21&#160;</span>¶ But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_22">22&#160;</span> Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I do not <span class='add'>this</span> for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_23">23&#160;</span> And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
<span class="verse" id="EK36_24">24&#160;</span> For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into your own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK36_25">25&#160;</span>¶ Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_26">26&#160;</span> A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_27">27&#160;</span> And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_28">28&#160;</span> And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_29">29&#160;</span> I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_30">30&#160;</span> And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_31">31&#160;</span> Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that <span class='add'>were</span> not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_32">32&#160;</span> Not for your sakes do I <span class='add'>this</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_33">33&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; In the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities I will also cause <span class='add'>you</span> to dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be builded. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_34">34&#160;</span> And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of all that passed by. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_35">35&#160;</span> And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities <span class='add'>are become</span> fenced, <span class='add'>and</span> are inhabited. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_36">36&#160;</span> Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> build the ruined <span class='add'>places, and</span> plant that that was desolate: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, and I will do <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_37">37&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; I will yet <span class='add'>for</span> this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do <span class='add'>it</span> for them; I will increase them with men like a flock. 
<span class="verse" id="EK36_38">38&#160;</span> As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK37_1">1&#160;</span> The hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was upon me, and carried me out in the spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and set me down in the midst of the valley which <span class='add'>was</span> full of bones, 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_2">2&#160;</span> And caused me to pass by them round about: and, behold, <span class='add'>there were</span> very many in the open valley; and, lo, <span class='add'>they were</span> very dry.
<span class="verse" id="EK37_3">3&#160;</span> And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, thou knowest. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_4">4&#160;</span> Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_5">5&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> unto these bones; Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live: 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_6">6&#160;</span> And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_7">7&#160;</span> So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_8">8&#160;</span> And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above: but <span class='add'>there was</span> no breath in them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_9">9&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.
<span class="verse" id="EK37_10">10&#160;</span> So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great army. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK37_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut off for our parts. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_13">13&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_14">14&#160;</span> And shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own land: then shall ye know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, and performed <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK37_15">15&#160;</span>¶ The word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came again unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_16">16&#160;</span> Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and <span class='add'>for</span> all the house of Israel his companions: 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_17">17&#160;</span> And join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK37_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou <span class='add'>meanest</span> by these? 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_19">19&#160;</span> Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, <span class='add'>even</span> with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK37_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_21">21&#160;</span> And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land: 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_22">22&#160;</span> And I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all: 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_23">23&#160;</span> Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_24">24&#160;</span> And David my servant <span class='add'>shall be</span> king over them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_25">25&#160;</span> And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, <span class='add'>even</span> they, and their children, and their children’s children for ever: and my servant David <span class='add'>shall be</span> their prince for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_26">26&#160;</span> Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_27">27&#160;</span> My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people. 
<span class="verse" id="EK37_28">28&#160;</span> And the heathen shall know that I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK38_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_2">2&#160;</span> Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,
<span class="verse" id="EK38_3">3&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_4">4&#160;</span> And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts <span class='add'>of armour, even</span> a great company <span class='add'>with</span> bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords: 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_5">5&#160;</span> Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and helmet:
<span class="verse" id="EK38_6">6&#160;</span> Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north quarters, and all his bands: <span class='add'>and</span> many people with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_7">7&#160;</span> Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK38_8">8&#160;</span>¶ After many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou shalt come into the land <span class='add'>that is</span> brought back from the sword, <span class='add'>and is</span> gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they shall dwell safely all of them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_9">9&#160;</span> Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_10">10&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; It shall also come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> at the same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought:
<span class="verse" id="EK38_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,
<span class="verse" id="EK38_12">12&#160;</span> To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine hand upon the desolate places <span class='add'>that are now</span> inhabited, and upon the people <span class='add'>that are</span> gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.
<span class="verse" id="EK38_13">13&#160;</span> Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK38_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt thou not know <span class='add'>it</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty army: 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_16">16&#160;</span> And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_17">17&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; <span class='add'>Art</span> thou he of whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days <span class='add'>many</span> years that I would bring thee against them?
<span class="verse" id="EK38_18">18&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, <span class='add'>that</span> my fury shall come up in my face. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_19">19&#160;</span> For in my jealousy <span class='add'>and</span> in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_20">20&#160;</span> So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that <span class='add'>are</span> upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.
<span class="verse" id="EK38_21">21&#160;</span> And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my mountains, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: every man’s sword shall be against his brother. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_22">22&#160;</span> And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that <span class='add'>are</span> with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. 
<span class="verse" id="EK38_23">23&#160;</span> Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK39_1">1&#160;</span> Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_2">2&#160;</span> And I will turn thee back, and leave but the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="EK39_3">3&#160;</span> And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_4">4&#160;</span> Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy bands, and the people that <span class='add'>is</span> with thee: I will give thee unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and <span class='add'>to</span> the beasts of the field to be devoured.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_5">5&#160;</span> Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken <span class='add'>it</span>, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_6">6&#160;</span> And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_7">7&#160;</span> So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I will not <span class='add'>let them</span> pollute my holy name any more: and the heathen shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Holy One in Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK39_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; this <span class='add'>is</span> the day whereof I have spoken. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_9">9&#160;</span> And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shall burn them with fire seven years:
<span class="verse" id="EK39_10">10&#160;</span> So that they shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down <span class='add'>any</span> out of the forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK39_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass in that day, <span class='add'>that</span> I will give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the east of the sea: and it shall stop the <span class='add'>noses</span> of the passengers: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and they shall call <span class='add'>it</span> The valley of Hamon-gog.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_12">12&#160;</span> And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_13">13&#160;</span> Yea, all the people of the land shall bury <span class='add'>them;</span> and it shall be to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_14">14&#160;</span> And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_15">15&#160;</span> And the passengers <span class='add'>that</span> pass through the land, when <span class='add'>any</span> seeth a man’s bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_16">16&#160;</span> And also the name of the city <span class='add'>shall be</span> Hamonah. Thus shall they cleanse the land.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK39_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, <span class='add'>even</span> a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_18">18&#160;</span> Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_19">19&#160;</span> And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_20">20&#160;</span> Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_21">21&#160;</span> And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_22">22&#160;</span> So the house of Israel shall know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God from that day and forward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK39_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies: so fell they all by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_24">24&#160;</span> According to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions have I done unto them, and hid my face from them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_25">25&#160;</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Now will I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name; 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_26">26&#160;</span> After that they have borne their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made <span class='add'>them</span> afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_27">27&#160;</span> When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of their enemies’ lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations; 
<span class="verse" id="EK39_28">28&#160;</span> Then shall they know that I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there.
<span class="verse" id="EK39_29">29&#160;</span> Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_1">1&#160;</span> In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was upon me, and brought me thither. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_2">2&#160;</span> In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by which <span class='add'>was</span> as the frame of a city on the south.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_3">3&#160;</span> And he brought me thither, and, behold, <span class='add'>there was</span> a man, whose appearance <span class='add'>was</span> like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_4">4&#160;</span> And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew thee; for to the intent that I might shew <span class='add'>them</span> unto thee <span class='add'>art</span> thou brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_5">5&#160;</span> And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the man’s hand a measuring reed of six cubits <span class='add'>long</span> by the cubit and an hand breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed; and the height, one reed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and went up the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate, <span class='add'>which was</span> one reed broad; and the other threshold <span class='add'>of the gate, which was</span> one reed broad.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>every</span> little chamber <span class='add'>was</span> one reed long, and one reed broad; and between the little chambers <span class='add'>were</span> five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate within <span class='add'>was</span> one reed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_8">8&#160;</span> He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_9">9&#160;</span> Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate <span class='add'>was</span> inward. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_10">10&#160;</span> And the little chambers of the gate eastward <span class='add'>were</span> three on this side, and three on that side; they three <span class='add'>were</span> of one measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_11">11&#160;</span> And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits; <span class='add'>and</span> the length of the gate, thirteen cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_12">12&#160;</span> The space also before the little chambers <span class='add'>was</span> one cubit <span class='add'>on this side</span>, and the space <span class='add'>was</span> one cubit on that side: and the little chambers <span class='add'>were</span> six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_13">13&#160;</span> He measured then the gate from the roof of <span class='add'>one</span> little chamber to the roof of another: the breadth <span class='add'>was</span> five and twenty cubits, door against door. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_14">14&#160;</span> He made also posts of threescore cubits, even unto the post of the court round about the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_15">15&#160;</span> And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of the porch of the inner gate <span class='add'>were</span> fifty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_16">16&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> narrow windows to the little chambers, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches: and windows <span class='add'>were</span> round about inward: and upon <span class='add'>each</span> post <span class='add'>were</span> palm trees.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_17">17&#160;</span> Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, <span class='add'>there were</span> chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty chambers <span class='add'>were</span> upon the pavement. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_18">18&#160;</span> And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the length of the gates <span class='add'>was</span> the lower pavement. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_19">19&#160;</span> Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundred cubits eastward and northward.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the gate of the outward court that looked toward the north, he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_21">21&#160;</span> And the little chambers thereof <span class='add'>were</span> three on this side and three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_22">22&#160;</span> And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, <span class='add'>were</span> after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof <span class='add'>were</span> before them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_23">23&#160;</span> And the gate of the inner court <span class='add'>was</span> over against the gate toward the north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an hundred cubits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_24">24&#160;</span>¶ After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches thereof according to these measures. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_25">25&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> windows in it and in the arches thereof round about, like those windows: the length <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_26">26&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> seven steps to go up to it, and the arches thereof <span class='add'>were</span> before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_27">27&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_28">28&#160;</span> And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he measured the south gate according to these measures; 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_29">29&#160;</span> And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, according to these measures: and <span class='add'>there were</span> windows in it and in the arches thereof round about: <span class='add'>it was</span> fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_30">30&#160;</span> And the arches round about <span class='add'>were</span> five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_31">31&#160;</span> And the arches thereof <span class='add'>were</span> toward the utter court; and palm trees <span class='add'>were</span> upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it <span class='add'>had</span> eight steps. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he measured the gate according to these measures. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_33">33&#160;</span> And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, <span class='add'>were</span> according to these measures: and <span class='add'>there were</span> windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: <span class='add'>it was</span> fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_34">34&#160;</span> And the arches thereof <span class='add'>were</span> toward the outward court; and palm trees <span class='add'>were</span> upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it <span class='add'>had</span> eight steps. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And he brought me to the north gate, and measured <span class='add'>it</span> according to these measures; 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_36">36&#160;</span> The little chambers thereof, the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about: the length <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_37">37&#160;</span> And the posts thereof <span class='add'>were</span> toward the utter court; and palm trees <span class='add'>were</span> upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it <span class='add'>had</span> eight steps. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_38">38&#160;</span> And the chambers and the entries thereof <span class='add'>were</span> by the posts of the gates, where they washed the burnt offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And in the porch of the gate <span class='add'>were</span> two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the sin offering and the trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_40">40&#160;</span> And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the north gate, <span class='add'>were</span> two tables; and on the other side, which <span class='add'>was</span> at the porch of the gate, <span class='add'>were</span> two tables.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_41">41&#160;</span> Four tables <span class='add'>were</span> on this side, and four tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew <span class='add'>their sacrifices</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_42">42&#160;</span> And the four tables <span class='add'>were</span> of hewn stone for the burnt offering, of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_43">43&#160;</span> And within <span class='add'>were</span> hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and upon the tables <span class='add'>was</span> the flesh of the offering.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_44">44&#160;</span>¶ And without the inner gate <span class='add'>were</span> the chambers of the singers in the inner court, which <span class='add'>was</span> at the side of the north gate; and their prospect <span class='add'>was</span> toward the south: one at the side of the east gate <span class='add'>having</span> the prospect toward the north. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_45">45&#160;</span> And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect <span class='add'>is</span> toward the south, <span class='add'>is</span> for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.
<span class="verse" id="EK40_46">46&#160;</span> And the chamber whose prospect <span class='add'>is</span> toward the north <span class='add'>is</span> for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to minister unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_47">47&#160;</span> So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar <span class='add'>that was</span> before the house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK40_48">48&#160;</span>¶ And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured <span class='add'>each</span> post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate <span class='add'>was</span> three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK40_49">49&#160;</span> The length of the porch <span class='add'>was</span> twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; and <span class='add'>he brought me</span> by the steps whereby they went up to it: and <span class='add'>there were</span> pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK41_1">1&#160;</span> Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side, <span class='add'>which was</span> the breadth of the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_2">2&#160;</span> And the breadth of the door <span class='add'>was</span> ten cubits; and the sides of the door <span class='add'>were</span> five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the breadth, twenty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="EK41_3">3&#160;</span> Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_4">4&#160;</span> So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This <span class='add'>is</span> the most holy <span class='add'>place</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_5">5&#160;</span> After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the breadth of <span class='add'>every</span> side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_6">6&#160;</span> And the side chambers <span class='add'>were</span> three, one over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into the wall which <span class='add'>was</span> of the house for the side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not hold in the wall of the house.
<span class="verse" id="EK41_7">7&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house <span class='add'>was still</span> upward, and so increased <span class='add'>from</span> the lowest <span class='add'>chamber</span> to the highest by the midst.
<span class="verse" id="EK41_8">8&#160;</span> I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations of the side chambers <span class='add'>were</span> a full reed of six great cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_9">9&#160;</span> The thickness of the wall, which <span class='add'>was</span> for the side chamber without, <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits: and <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>was</span> left <span class='add'>was</span> the place of the side chambers that <span class='add'>were</span> within. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_10">10&#160;</span> And between the chambers <span class='add'>was</span> the wideness of twenty cubits round about the house on every side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_11">11&#160;</span> And the doors of the side chambers <span class='add'>were</span> toward <span class='add'>the place that was</span> left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was left <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK41_12">12&#160;</span> Now the building that <span class='add'>was</span> before the separate place at the end toward the west <span class='add'>was</span> seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_13">13&#160;</span> So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred cubits long; 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_14">14&#160;</span> Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_15">15&#160;</span> And he measured the length of the building over against the separate place which <span class='add'>was</span> behind it, and the galleries thereof on the one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner temple, and the porches of the court;
<span class="verse" id="EK41_16">16&#160;</span> The door posts, and the narrow windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories, over against the door, cieled with wood round about, and from the ground up to the windows, and the windows <span class='add'>were</span> covered;
<span class="verse" id="EK41_17">17&#160;</span> To that above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the wall round about within and without, by measure.
<span class="verse" id="EK41_18">18&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>it was</span> made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm tree <span class='add'>was</span> between a cherub and a cherub; and <span class='add'>every</span> cherub had two faces; 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_19">19&#160;</span> So that the face of a man <span class='add'>was</span> toward the palm tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side: <span class='add'>it was</span> made through all the house round about. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_20">20&#160;</span> From the ground unto above the door <span class='add'>were</span> cherubims and palm trees made, and <span class='add'>on</span> the wall of the temple. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_21">21&#160;</span> The posts of the temple <span class='add'>were</span> squared, <span class='add'>and</span> the face of the sanctuary; the appearance <span class='add'>of the one</span> as the appearance <span class='add'>of the other</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK41_22">22&#160;</span> The altar of wood <span class='add'>was</span> three cubits high, and the length thereof two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the walls thereof, <span class='add'>were</span> of wood: and he said unto me, This <span class='add'>is</span> the table that <span class='add'>is</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_23">23&#160;</span> And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_24">24&#160;</span> And the doors had two leaves <span class='add'>apiece</span>, two turning leaves; two <span class='add'>leaves</span> for the one door, and two leaves for the other <span class='add'>door</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_25">25&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubims and palm trees, like as <span class='add'>were</span> made upon the walls; and <span class='add'>there were</span> thick planks upon the face of the porch without. 
<span class="verse" id="EK41_26">26&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and <span class='add'>upon</span> the side chambers of the house, and thick planks.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK42_1">1&#160;</span> Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the north: and he brought me into the chamber that <span class='add'>was</span> over against the separate place, and which <span class='add'>was</span> before the building toward the north. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_2">2&#160;</span> Before the length of an hundred cubits <span class='add'>was</span> the north door, and the breadth <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_3">3&#160;</span> Over against the twenty <span class='add'>cubits</span> which <span class='add'>were</span> for the inner court, and over against the pavement which <span class='add'>was</span> for the utter court, <span class='add'>was</span> gallery against gallery in three <span class='add'>stories</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_4">4&#160;</span> And before the chambers <span class='add'>was</span> a walk of ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_5">5&#160;</span> Now the upper chambers <span class='add'>were</span> shorter: for the galleries were higher than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the building.
<span class="verse" id="EK42_6">6&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>were</span> in three <span class='add'>stories</span>, but had not pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore <span class='add'>the building</span> was straitened more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_7">7&#160;</span> And the wall that <span class='add'>was</span> without over against the chambers, toward the utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_8">8&#160;</span> For the length of the chambers that <span class='add'>were</span> in the utter court <span class='add'>was</span> fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple <span class='add'>were</span> an hundred cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_9">9&#160;</span> And from under these chambers <span class='add'>was</span> the entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the utter court.
<span class="verse" id="EK42_10">10&#160;</span> The chambers <span class='add'>were</span> in the thickness of the wall of the court toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the building. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_11">11&#160;</span> And the way before them <span class='add'>was</span> like the appearance of the chambers which <span class='add'>were</span> toward the north, as long as they, <span class='add'>and</span> as broad as they: and all their goings out <span class='add'>were</span> both according to their fashions, and according to their doors. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_12">12&#160;</span> And according to the doors of the chambers that <span class='add'>were</span> toward the south <span class='add'>was</span> a door in the head of the way, <span class='add'>even</span> the way directly before the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK42_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then said he unto me, The north chambers <span class='add'>and</span> the south chambers, which <span class='add'>are</span> before the separate place, they <span class='add'>be</span> holy chambers, where the priests that approach unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall eat the most holy things: there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place <span class='add'>is</span> holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_14">14&#160;</span> When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of the holy <span class='add'>place</span> into the utter court, but there they shall lay their garments wherein they minister; for they <span class='add'>are</span> holy; and shall put on other garments, and shall approach to <span class='add'>those things</span> which <span class='add'>are</span> for the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK42_15">15&#160;</span> Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect <span class='add'>is</span> toward the east, and measured it round about. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_16">16&#160;</span> He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.
<span class="verse" id="EK42_17">17&#160;</span> He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_18">18&#160;</span> He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK42_19">19&#160;</span>¶ He turned about to the west side, <span class='add'>and</span> measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK42_20">20&#160;</span> He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about, five hundred <span class='add'>reeds</span> long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation between the sanctuary and the profane place.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK43_0'> 43</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK43_1">1&#160;</span> Afterward he brought me to the gate, <span class='add'>even</span> the gate that looketh toward the east: 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_2">2&#160;</span> And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice <span class='add'>was</span> like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_3">3&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>it was</span> according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, <span class='add'>even</span> according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city: and the visions <span class='add'>were</span> like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I fell upon my face.
<span class="verse" id="EK43_4">4&#160;</span> And the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect <span class='add'>is</span> toward the east. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_5">5&#160;</span> So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court; and, behold, the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> filled the house. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_6">6&#160;</span> And I heard <span class='add'>him</span> speaking unto me out of the house; and the man stood by me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK43_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of Israel no more defile, <span class='add'>neither</span> they, nor their kings, by their whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_8">8&#160;</span> In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have committed: wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger.
<span class="verse" id="EK43_9">9&#160;</span> Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK43_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the pattern.
<span class="verse" id="EK43_11">11&#160;</span> And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof: and write <span class='add'>it</span> in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_12">12&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about <span class='add'>shall be</span> most holy. Behold, this <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK43_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the measures of the altar after the cubits: The cubit <span class='add'>is</span> a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom <span class='add'>shall be</span> a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round about <span class='add'>shall be</span> a span: and this <span class='add'>shall be</span> the higher place of the altar.
<span class="verse" id="EK43_14">14&#160;</span> And from the bottom <span class='add'>upon</span> the ground <span class='add'>even</span> to the lower settle <span class='add'>shall be</span> two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser settle <span class='add'>even</span> to the greater settle <span class='add'>shall be</span> four cubits, and the breadth <span class='add'>one</span> cubit. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_15">15&#160;</span> So the altar <span class='add'>shall be</span> four cubits; and from the altar and upward <span class='add'>shall be</span> four horns.
<span class="verse" id="EK43_16">16&#160;</span> And the altar <span class='add'>shall be</span> twelve <span class='add'>cubits</span> long, twelve broad, square in the four squares thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_17">17&#160;</span> And the settle <span class='add'>shall be</span> fourteen <span class='add'>cubits</span> long and fourteen broad in the four squares thereof; and the border about it <span class='add'>shall be</span> half a cubit; and the bottom thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> a cubit about; and his stairs shall look toward the east. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK43_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; These <span class='add'>are</span> the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_19">19&#160;</span> And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the seed of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, a young bullock for a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_20">20&#160;</span> And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put <span class='add'>it</span> on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_21">21&#160;</span> Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he shall burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_22">22&#160;</span> And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar, as they did cleanse <span class='add'>it</span> with the bullock. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_23">23&#160;</span> When thou hast made an end of cleansing <span class='add'>it</span>, thou shalt offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_24">24&#160;</span> And thou shalt offer them before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_25">25&#160;</span> Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock, without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="EK43_26">26&#160;</span> Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they shall consecrate themselves.
<span class="verse" id="EK43_27">27&#160;</span> And when these days are expired, it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> upon the eighth day, and <span class='add'>so</span> forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept you, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK44_0'> 44</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK44_1">1&#160;</span> Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it <span class='add'>was</span> shut. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_2">2&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; he shall enter by the way of the porch of <span class='add'>that</span> gate, and shall go out by the way of the same. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK44_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> filled the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and I fell upon my face. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and all the laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt say to the rebellious, <span class='add'>even</span> to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations, 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_7">7&#160;</span> In that ye have brought <span class='add'>into my sanctuary</span> strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, <span class='add'>even</span> my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant because of all your abominations.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_8">8&#160;</span> And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK44_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that <span class='add'>is</span> among the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK44_10">10&#160;</span> And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall even bear their iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_11">11&#160;</span> Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, <span class='add'>having</span> charge at the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_12">12&#160;</span> Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up mine hand against them, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, and they shall bear their iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_13">13&#160;</span> And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most holy <span class='add'>place:</span> but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_14">14&#160;</span> But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK44_15">15&#160;</span>¶ But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_16">16&#160;</span> They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK44_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_18">18&#160;</span> They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird <span class='add'>themselves</span> with any thing that causeth sweat.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_19">19&#160;</span> And when they go forth into the utter court, <span class='add'>even</span> into the utter court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their garments. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_20">20&#160;</span> Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; they shall only poll their heads. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_21">21&#160;</span> Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the inner court. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_22">22&#160;</span> Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_23">23&#160;</span> And they shall teach my people <span class='add'>the difference</span> between the holy and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_24">24&#160;</span> And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; <span class='add'>and</span> they shall judge it according to my judgments: and they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_25">25&#160;</span> And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_26">26&#160;</span> And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_27">27&#160;</span> And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_28">28&#160;</span> And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I <span class='add'>am</span> their inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I <span class='add'>am</span> their possession. 
<span class="verse" id="EK44_29">29&#160;</span> They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering; and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be theirs.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_30">30&#160;</span> And the first of all the firstfruits of all <span class='add'>things</span>, and every oblation of all, of every <span class='add'>sort</span> of your oblations, shall be the priest’s: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.
<span class="verse" id="EK44_31">31&#160;</span> The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK45_0'> 45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK45_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, an holy portion of the land: the length <span class='add'>shall be</span> the length of five and twenty thousand <span class='add'>reeds</span>, and the breadth <span class='add'>shall be</span> ten thousand. This <span class='add'>shall be</span> holy in all the borders thereof round about.
<span class="verse" id="EK45_2">2&#160;</span> Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred <span class='add'>in length</span>, with five hundred <span class='add'>in breadth</span>, square round about; and fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof.
<span class="verse" id="EK45_3">3&#160;</span> And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be the sanctuary <span class='add'>and</span> the most holy <span class='add'>place</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_4">4&#160;</span> The holy <span class='add'>portion</span> of the land shall be for the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and it shall be a place for their houses, and an holy place for the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_5">5&#160;</span> And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of breadth, shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK45_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of the holy <span class='add'>portion:</span> it shall be for the whole house of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK45_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And a <span class='add'>portion shall be</span> for the prince on the one side and on the other side of the oblation of the holy <span class='add'>portion</span>, and of the possession of the city, before the oblation of the holy <span class='add'>portion</span>, and before the possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east side eastward: and the length <span class='add'>shall be</span> over against one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_8">8&#160;</span> In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people; and <span class='add'>the rest of</span> the land shall they give to the house of Israel according to their tribes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK45_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK45_10">10&#160;</span> Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_11">11&#160;</span> The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_12">12&#160;</span> And the shekel <span class='add'>shall be</span> twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK45_13">13&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the oblation that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of barley: 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_14">14&#160;</span> Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, <span class='add'>ye shall offer</span> the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, <span class='add'>which is</span> an homer of ten baths; for ten baths <span class='add'>are</span> an homer: 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_15">15&#160;</span> And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK45_16">16&#160;</span> All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the prince in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EK45_17">17&#160;</span> And it shall be the prince’s part <span class='add'>to give</span> burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for the house of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="EK45_18">18&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; In the first <span class='add'>month</span>, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and cleanse the sanctuary: 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_19">19&#160;</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_20">20&#160;</span> And so thou shalt do the seventh <span class='add'>day</span> of the month for every one that erreth, and for <span class='add'>him that is</span> simple: so shall ye reconcile the house. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_21">21&#160;</span> In the first <span class='add'>month</span>, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_22">22&#160;</span> And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_23">23&#160;</span> And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a kid of the goats daily <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_24">24&#160;</span> And he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah. 
<span class="verse" id="EK45_25">25&#160;</span> In the seventh <span class='add'>month</span>, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall he do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat offering, and according to the oil.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK46_0'> 46</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK46_1">1&#160;</span> Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; The gate of the inner court that looketh toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_2">2&#160;</span> And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of <span class='add'>that</span> gate without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_3">3&#160;</span> Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the sabbaths and in the new moons. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_4">4&#160;</span> And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the sabbath day <span class='add'>shall be</span> six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_5">5&#160;</span> And the meat offering <span class='add'>shall be</span> an ephah for a ram, and the meat offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.
<span class="verse" id="EK46_6">6&#160;</span> And in the day of the new moon <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_7">7&#160;</span> And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_8">8&#160;</span> And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of <span class='add'>that</span> gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK46_9">9&#160;</span>¶ But when the people of the land shall come before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth over against it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_10">10&#160;</span> And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_11">11&#160;</span> And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_12">12&#160;</span> Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or peace offerings voluntarily unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>one</span> shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and after his going forth <span class='add'>one</span> shall shut the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_13">13&#160;</span> Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>of</span> a lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every morning.
<span class="verse" id="EK46_14">14&#160;</span> And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual ordinance unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_15">15&#160;</span> Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the oil, every morning <span class='add'>for</span> a continual burnt offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK46_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons’; it <span class='add'>shall be</span> their possession by inheritance. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_17">17&#160;</span> But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons’ for them. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_18">18&#160;</span> Moreover the prince shall not take of the people’s inheritance by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; <span class='add'>but</span> he shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be not scattered every man from his possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK46_19">19&#160;</span>¶ After he brought me through the entry, which <span class='add'>was</span> at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward the north: and, behold, there <span class='add'>was</span> a place on the two sides westward. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_20">20&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, This <span class='add'>is</span> the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake the meat offering; that they bear <span class='add'>them</span> not out into the utter court, to sanctify the people. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_21">21&#160;</span> Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court <span class='add'>there was</span> a court.
<span class="verse" id="EK46_22">22&#160;</span> In the four corners of the court <span class='add'>there were</span> courts joined of forty <span class='add'>cubits</span> long and thirty broad: these four corners <span class='add'>were</span> of one measure.
<span class="verse" id="EK46_23">23&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> a row <span class='add'>of building</span> round about in them, round about them four, and <span class='add'>it was</span> made with boiling places under the rows round about. 
<span class="verse" id="EK46_24">24&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, These <span class='add'>are</span> the places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK47_0'> 47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK47_1">1&#160;</span> Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house <span class='add'>stood toward</span> the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south <span class='add'>side</span> of the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_2">2&#160;</span> Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_3">3&#160;</span> And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters <span class='add'>were</span> to the ankles.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_4">4&#160;</span> Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters <span class='add'>were</span> to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters <span class='add'>were</span> to the loins. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_5">5&#160;</span> Afterward he measured a thousand; <span class='add'>and it was</span> a river that I could not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed over.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK47_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen <span class='add'>this</span>? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_7">7&#160;</span> Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river <span class='add'>were</span> very many trees on the one side and on the other.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_8">8&#160;</span> Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: <span class='add'>which being</span> brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_9">9&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live whither the river cometh.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_10">10&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> the fishers shall stand upon it from En-gedi even unto En-eglaim; they shall be a <span class='add'>place</span> to spread forth nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, exceeding many. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_11">11&#160;</span> But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not be healed; they shall be given to salt.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_12">12&#160;</span> And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade, neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK47_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>; This <span class='add'>shall be</span> the border, whereby ye shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph <span class='add'>shall have two</span> portions. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_14">14&#160;</span> And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: <span class='add'>concerning</span> the which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this land shall fall unto you for inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_15">15&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>shall be</span> the border of the land toward the north side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad; 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_16">16&#160;</span> Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which <span class='add'>is</span> between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazar-hatticon, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the coast of Hauran.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_17">17&#160;</span> And the border from the sea shall be Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And <span class='add'>this is</span> the north side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_18">18&#160;</span> And the east side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel <span class='add'>by</span> Jordan, from the border unto the east sea. And <span class='add'>this is</span> the east side.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_19">19&#160;</span> And the south side southward, from Tamar <span class='add'>even</span> to the waters of strife <span class='add'>in</span> Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And <span class='add'>this is</span> the south side southward.
<span class="verse" id="EK47_20">20&#160;</span> The west side also <span class='add'>shall be</span> the great sea from the border, till a man come over against Hamath. This <span class='add'>is</span> the west side. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_21">21&#160;</span> So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK47_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you, which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as born in the country among the children of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK47_23">23&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> in what tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give <span class='add'>him</span> his inheritance, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='EK48_0'> 48</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK48_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of the tribes. From the north end to the coast of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazar-enan, the border of Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are his sides east <span class='add'>and</span> west; a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Dan.
<span class="verse" id="EK48_2">2&#160;</span> And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side, a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Asher. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_3">3&#160;</span> And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west side, a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Naphtali. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_4">4&#160;</span> And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side, a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Manasseh. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_5">5&#160;</span> And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west side, a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Ephraim. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_6">6&#160;</span> And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west side, a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Reuben. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_7">7&#160;</span> And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side, a <span class='add'>portion for</span> Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK48_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side, shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and twenty thousand <span class='add'>reeds in</span> breadth, and <span class='add'>in</span> length as one of the <span class='add'>other</span> parts, from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_9">9&#160;</span> The oblation that ye shall offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>shall be</span> of five and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_10">10&#160;</span>And for them, <span class='add'>even</span> for the priests, shall be <span class='add'>this</span> holy oblation; toward the north five and twenty thousand <span class='add'>in length</span>, and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and the sanctuary of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be in the midst thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It shall be</span> for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.
<span class="verse" id="EK48_12">12&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>this</span> oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto them a thing most holy by the border of the Levites. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_13">13&#160;</span> And over against the border of the priests the Levites <span class='add'>shall have</span> five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: all the length <span class='add'>shall be</span> five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_14">14&#160;</span> And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the firstfruits of the land: for <span class='add'>it is</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK48_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against the five and twenty thousand, shall be a profane <span class='add'>place</span> for the city, for dwelling, and for suburbs: and the city shall be in the midst thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_16">16&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>shall be</span> the measures thereof; the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_17">17&#160;</span> And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_18">18&#160;</span> And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy <span class='add'>portion shall be</span> ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and it shall be over against the oblation of the holy <span class='add'>portion;</span> and the increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_19">19&#160;</span> And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the tribes of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_20">20&#160;</span> All the oblation <span class='add'>shall be</span> five and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare, with the possession of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK48_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the residue <span class='add'>shall be</span> for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation, and of the possession of the city, over against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand toward the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and it shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the midst thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_22">22&#160;</span> Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the possession of the city, <span class='add'>being</span> in the midst <span class='add'>of that</span> which is the prince’s, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, shall be for the prince. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_23">23&#160;</span> As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west side, Benjamin <span class='add'>shall have</span> a <span class='add'>portion</span>.
<span class="verse" id="EK48_24">24&#160;</span> And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west side, Simeon <span class='add'>shall have</span> a <span class='add'>portion</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_25">25&#160;</span> And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side, Issachar a <span class='add'>portion</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_26">26&#160;</span> And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west side, Zebulun a <span class='add'>portion</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_27">27&#160;</span> And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side, Gad a <span class='add'>portion</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_28">28&#160;</span> And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar <span class='add'>unto</span> the waters of strife <span class='add'>in</span> Kadesh, <span class='add'>and</span> to the river toward the great sea.
<span class="verse" id="EK48_29">29&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these <span class='add'>are</span> their portions, saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK48_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the goings out of the city on the north side, four thousand and five hundred measures. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EK48_31">31&#160;</span> And the gates of the city <span class='add'>shall be</span> after the names of the tribes of Israel: three gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_32">32&#160;</span> And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three gates; and one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_33">33&#160;</span> And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures: and three gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Issachar, one gate of Zebulun. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_34">34&#160;</span> At the west side four thousand and five hundred, <span class='add'>with</span> their three gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali. 
<span class="verse" id="EK48_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It was</span> round about eighteen thousand <span class='add'>measures:</span> and the name of the city from <span class='add'>that</span> day <span class='add'>shall be</span>, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> there.<span class='nd'></span> </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
