<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Judges 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Judges</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JDG.xhtml#JG21_0'>21</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JG0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Judges  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JG1_1">1&#160;</span> Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children of Israel asked the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first, to fight against them? 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Judah shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_3">3&#160;</span> And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_4">4&#160;</span> And Judah went up; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_5">5&#160;</span> And they found Adoni-bezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_6">6&#160;</span> But Adoni-bezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_7">7&#160;</span> And Adoni-bezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered <span class='add'>their meat</span> under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died.
<span class="verse" id="JG1_8">8&#160;</span> Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the valley.
<span class="verse" id="JG1_10">10&#160;</span> And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the name of Hebron before <span class='add'>was</span> Kirjath-arba:) and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_11">11&#160;</span> And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before <span class='add'>was</span> Kirjath-sepher: 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_12">12&#160;</span> And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_13">13&#160;</span> And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_14">14&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when she came <span class='add'>to him</span>, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off <span class='add'>her</span> ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou? 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_15">15&#160;</span> And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the children of the Kenite, Moses’ father in law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which <span class='add'>lieth</span> in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_17">17&#160;</span> And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_18">18&#160;</span> Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_19">19&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with Judah; and he drave out <span class='add'>the inhabitants of</span> the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because they had chariots of iron.
<span class="verse" id="JG1_20">20&#160;</span> And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence the three sons of Anak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_21">21&#160;</span> And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Beth-el: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>was</span> with them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_23">23&#160;</span> And the house of Joseph sent to descry Beth-el. (Now the name of the city before <span class='add'>was</span> Luz.) 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_24">24&#160;</span> And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_25">25&#160;</span> And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all his family. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_26">26&#160;</span> And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name thereof Luz: which <span class='add'>is</span> the name thereof unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Neither did Manasseh drive out <span class='add'>the inhabitants of</span> Beth-shean and her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell in that land. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_28">28&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob: 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_32">32&#160;</span> But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG1_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the inhabitants of Beth-anath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became tributaries unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_34">34&#160;</span> And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 
<span class="verse" id="JG1_35">35&#160;</span> But the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.
<span class="verse" id="JG1_36">36&#160;</span> And the coast of the Amorites <span class='add'>was</span> from the going up to Akrabbim, from the rock, and upward.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG2_1">1&#160;</span> And an angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my covenant with you.
<span class="verse" id="JG2_2">2&#160;</span> And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this? 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_3">3&#160;</span> Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you; but they shall be <span class='add'>as thorns</span> in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_4">4&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake these words unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_5">5&#160;</span> And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed there unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG2_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to possess the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_7">7&#160;</span> And the people served the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great works of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he did for Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JG2_8">8&#160;</span> And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, died, <span class='add'>being</span> an hundred and ten years old. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_9">9&#160;</span> And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill Gaash.
<span class="verse" id="JG2_10">10&#160;</span> And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG2_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and served Baalim: 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_12">12&#160;</span> And they forsook the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the people that <span class='add'>were</span> round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_13">13&#160;</span> And they forsook the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and served Baal and Ashtaroth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_15">15&#160;</span> Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was against them for evil, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said, and as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distressed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG2_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Nevertheless the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> raised up judges, which delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them.
<span class="verse" id="JG2_17">17&#160;</span> And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; <span class='add'>but</span> they did not so. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_18">18&#160;</span> And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> raised them up judges, then the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge: for it repented the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> because of their groanings by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_19">19&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, <span class='add'>that</span> they returned, and corrupted <span class='add'>themselves</span> more than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stubborn way.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG2_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_21">21&#160;</span> I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died: 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_22">22&#160;</span> That through them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to walk therein, as their fathers did keep <span class='add'>it</span>, or not. 
<span class="verse" id="JG2_23">23&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG3_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the nations which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> left, to prove Israel by them, <span class='add'>even</span> as many <span class='add'>of Israel</span> as had not known all the wars of Canaan; 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_2">2&#160;</span> Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Namely</span>, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon unto the entering in of Hamath. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_4">4&#160;</span> And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites, and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_6">6&#160;</span> And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_7">7&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and forgat the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and served Baalim and the groves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Therefore the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushan-rishathaim eight years.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_9">9&#160;</span> And when the children of Israel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, <span class='add'>even</span> Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb’s younger brother.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_10">10&#160;</span> And the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered Chushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushan-rishathaim.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_11">11&#160;</span> And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG3_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_13">13&#160;</span> And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_14">14&#160;</span> So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_15">15&#160;</span> But when the children of Israel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon the king of Moab.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_16">16&#160;</span> But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_17">17&#160;</span> And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon <span class='add'>was</span> a very fat man. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_18">18&#160;</span> And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away the people that bare the present. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_19">19&#160;</span> But he himself turned again from the quarries that <span class='add'>were</span> by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said, Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_20">20&#160;</span> And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour, which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee. And he arose out of <span class='add'>his</span> seat.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_21">21&#160;</span> And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly: 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_22">22&#160;</span> And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_23">23&#160;</span> Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the parlour upon him, and locked them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_24">24&#160;</span> When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the doors of the parlour <span class='add'>were</span> locked, they said, Surely he covereth his feet in his summer chamber.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_25">25&#160;</span> And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened <span class='add'>them:</span> and, behold, their lord <span class='add'>was</span> fallen down dead on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_26">26&#160;</span> And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped unto Seirath. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_27">27&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_28">28&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over. 
<span class="verse" id="JG3_29">29&#160;</span> And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man.
<span class="verse" id="JG3_30">30&#160;</span> So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG3_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG4_1">1&#160;</span> And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when Ehud was dead. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host <span class='add'>was</span> Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_3">3&#160;</span> And the children of Israel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_5">5&#160;</span> And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Beth-el in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_6">6&#160;</span> And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh-naphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel commanded, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun? 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_7">7&#160;</span> And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin’s army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I will deliver him into thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_8">8&#160;</span> And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go: but if thou wilt not go with me, <span class='add'>then</span> I will not go. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_9">9&#160;</span> And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG4_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_11">11&#160;</span> Now Heber the Kenite, <span class='add'>which was</span> of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which <span class='add'>is</span> by Kedesh. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_12">12&#160;</span> And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_13">13&#160;</span> And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, <span class='add'>even</span> nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon.
<span class="verse" id="JG4_14">14&#160;</span> And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this <span class='add'>is</span> the day in which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gone out before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> discomfited Sisera, and all <span class='add'>his</span> chariots, and all <span class='add'>his</span> host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down off <span class='add'>his</span> chariot, and fled away on his feet. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_16">16&#160;</span> But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword; <span class='add'>and</span> there was not a man left.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG4_17">17&#160;</span> Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite: for <span class='add'>there was</span> peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG4_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle.
<span class="verse" id="JG4_19">19&#160;</span> And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_20">20&#160;</span> Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_21">21&#160;</span> Then Jael Heber’s wife took a nail of the tent, and took an hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep and weary. So he died.
<span class="verse" id="JG4_22">22&#160;</span> And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her <span class='add'>tent</span>, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail <span class='add'>was</span> in his temples. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_23">23&#160;</span> So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG4_24">24&#160;</span> And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG5_1">1&#160;</span> Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_2">2&#160;</span> Praise ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly offered themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_3">3&#160;</span> Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, <span class='add'>even</span> I, will sing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I will sing <span class='add'>praise</span> to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped water. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_5">5&#160;</span> The mountains melted from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> that Sinai from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG5_6">6&#160;</span> In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>The inhabitants of</span> the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_8">8&#160;</span> They chose new gods; then <span class='add'>was</span> war in the gates: was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_9">9&#160;</span> My heart <span class='add'>is</span> toward the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_10">10&#160;</span> Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They that are delivered</span> from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> the righteous acts <span class='add'>toward the inhabitants</span> of his villages in Israel: then shall the people of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> go down to the gates.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG5_12">12&#160;</span> Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_13">13&#160;</span> Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made me have dominion over the mighty. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_14">14&#160;</span> Out of Ephraim <span class='add'>was there</span> a root of them against Amalek; after thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_15">15&#160;</span> And the princes of Issachar <span class='add'>were</span> with Deborah; even Issachar, and also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of Reuben <span class='add'>there were</span> great thoughts of heart.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_16">16&#160;</span> Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben <span class='add'>there were</span> great searchings of heart.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_17">17&#160;</span> Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_18">18&#160;</span> Zebulun and Naphtali <span class='add'>were</span> a people <span class='add'>that</span> jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_19">19&#160;</span> The kings came <span class='add'>and</span> fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_20">20&#160;</span> They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_21">21&#160;</span> The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_22">22&#160;</span> Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_23">23&#160;</span> Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to the help of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> against the mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG5_24">24&#160;</span> Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above women in the tent. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_25">25&#160;</span> He asked water, <span class='add'>and</span> she gave <span class='add'>him</span> milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish. 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_26">26&#160;</span> She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_27">27&#160;</span> At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead.
<span class="verse" id="JG5_28">28&#160;</span> The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot <span class='add'>so</span> long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his chariots? 
<span class="verse" id="JG5_29">29&#160;</span> Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,
<span class="verse" id="JG5_30">30&#160;</span> Have they not sped? have they <span class='add'>not</span> divided the prey; to every man a damsel <span class='add'>or</span> two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, <span class='add'>meet</span> for the necks of <span class='add'>them that take</span> the spoil?
<span class="verse" id="JG5_31">31&#160;</span> So let all thine enemies perish, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <span class='add'>let</span> them that love him <span class='add'>be</span> as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_1">1&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_2">2&#160;</span> And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: <span class='add'>and</span> because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which <span class='add'>are</span> in the mountains, and caves, and strong holds.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_3">3&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>so</span> it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against them; 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_4">4&#160;</span> And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_5">5&#160;</span> For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came as grasshoppers for multitude; <span class='add'>for</span> both they and their camels were without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_6">6&#160;</span> And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and the children of Israel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> because of the Midianites, 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_8">8&#160;</span> That the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage;
<span class="verse" id="JG6_9">9&#160;</span> And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave them out from before you, and gave you their land; 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_10">10&#160;</span> And I said unto you, I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And there came an angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and sat under an oak which <span class='add'>was</span> in Ophrah, that <span class='add'>pertained</span> unto Joash the Abi-ezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide <span class='add'>it</span> from the Midianites.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_12">12&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto him, and said unto him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with thee, thou mighty man of valour. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_13">13&#160;</span> And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where <span class='add'>be</span> all his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bring us up from Egypt? but now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thee? 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_15">15&#160;</span> And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my family <span class='add'>is</span> poor in Manasseh, and I <span class='add'>am</span> the least in my father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_16">16&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_17">17&#160;</span> And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_18">18&#160;</span> Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring forth my present, and set <span class='add'>it</span> before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought <span class='add'>it</span> out unto him under the oak, and presented <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_20">20&#160;</span> And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay <span class='add'>them</span> upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> put forth the end of the staff that <span class='add'>was</span> in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> departed out of his sight. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_22">22&#160;</span> And when Gideon perceived that he <span class='add'>was</span> an angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Gideon said, Alas, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>! for because I have seen an angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> face to face. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_23">23&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Peace <span class='add'>be</span> unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_24">24&#160;</span> Then Gideon built an altar there unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and called it Jehovah-shalom: unto this day it <span class='add'>is</span> yet in Ophrah of the Abi-ezrites.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass the same night, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Take thy father’s young bullock, even the second bullock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that <span class='add'>is</span> by it:
<span class="verse" id="JG6_26">26&#160;</span> And build an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the grove which thou shalt cut down.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_27">27&#160;</span> Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said unto him: and <span class='add'>so</span> it was, because he feared his father’s household, and the men of the city, that he could not do <span class='add'>it</span> by day, that he did <span class='add'>it</span> by night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that <span class='add'>was</span> by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar <span class='add'>that was</span> built. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_29">29&#160;</span> And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_30">30&#160;</span> Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because he hath cut down the grove that <span class='add'>was</span> by it. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_31">31&#160;</span> And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to death whilst <span class='add'>it is yet</span> morning: if he <span class='add'>be</span> a god, let him plead for himself, because <span class='add'>one</span> hath cast down his altar. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_32">32&#160;</span> Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the valley of Jezreel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_34">34&#160;</span> But the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; and Abi-ezer was gathered after him.
<span class="verse" id="JG6_35">35&#160;</span> And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG6_36">36&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said, 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_37">37&#160;</span> Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the floor; <span class='add'>and</span> if the dew be on the fleece only, and <span class='add'>it be</span> dry upon all the earth <span class='add'>beside</span>, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_38">38&#160;</span> And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of water. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_39">39&#160;</span> And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew. 
<span class="verse" id="JG6_40">40&#160;</span> And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_1">1&#160;</span> Then Jerubbaal, who <span class='add'>is</span> Gideon, and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Gideon, The people that <span class='add'>are</span> with thee <span class='add'>are</span> too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_3">3&#160;</span> Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever <span class='add'>is</span> fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_4">4&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Gideon, The people <span class='add'>are</span> yet <span class='add'>too</span> many; bring them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall not go with thee, the same shall not go. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_5">5&#160;</span> So he brought down the people unto the water: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon his knees to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_6">6&#160;</span> And the number of them that lapped, <span class='add'>putting</span> their hand to their mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_7">7&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let all the <span class='add'>other</span> people go every man unto his place. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_8">8&#160;</span> So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he sent all <span class='add'>the rest of</span> Israel every man unto his tent, and retained those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the valley. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass the same night, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_10">10&#160;</span> But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the host: 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_11">11&#160;</span> And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that <span class='add'>were</span> in the host.
<span class="verse" id="JG7_12">12&#160;</span> And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and their camels <span class='add'>were</span> without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_13">13&#160;</span> And when Gideon was come, behold, <span class='add'>there was</span> a man that told a dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_14">14&#160;</span> And his fellow answered and said, This <span class='add'>is</span> nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: <span class='add'>for</span> into his hand hath God delivered Midian, and all the host. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And it was <span class='add'>so</span>, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_16">16&#160;</span> And he divided the three hundred men <span class='add'>into</span> three companies, and he put a trumpet in every man’s hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers.
<span class="verse" id="JG7_17">17&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold, when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be <span class='add'>that</span>, as I do, so shall ye do. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_18">18&#160;</span> When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that <span class='add'>are</span> with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, <span class='add'>The sword</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and of Gideon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_19">19&#160;</span>¶ So Gideon, and the hundred men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, came unto the outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that <span class='add'>were</span> in their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_20">20&#160;</span> And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow <span class='add'>withal:</span> and they cried, The sword of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and of Gideon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_21">21&#160;</span> And they stood every man in his place round about the camp: and all the host ran, and cried, and fled. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_22">22&#160;</span> And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> set every man’s sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the host fled to Beth-shittah in Zererath, <span class='add'>and</span> to the border of Abel-meholah, unto Tabbath.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_23">23&#160;</span> And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after the Midianites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG7_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying, Come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Beth-barah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and took the waters unto Beth-barah and Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="JG7_25">25&#160;</span> And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon on the other side Jordan.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_1">1&#160;</span> And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply.
<span class="verse" id="JG8_2">2&#160;</span> And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? <span class='add'>Is</span> not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abi-ezer? 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_3">3&#160;</span> God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon came to Jordan, <span class='add'>and</span> passed over, he, and the three hundred men that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, faint, yet pursuing <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_5">5&#160;</span> And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that follow me; for they <span class='add'>be</span> faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the princes of Succoth said, <span class='add'>Are</span> the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army? 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_7">7&#160;</span> And Gideon said, Therefore when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered <span class='add'>him</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_9">9&#160;</span> And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Now Zebah and Zalmunna <span class='add'>were</span> in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fifteen thousand <span class='add'>men</span>, all that were left of all the hosts of the children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host: for the host was secure. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_12">12&#160;</span> And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun <span class='add'>was up</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_14">14&#160;</span> And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and the elders thereof, <span class='add'>even</span> threescore and seventeen men.
<span class="verse" id="JG8_15">15&#160;</span> And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, <span class='add'>Are</span> the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men <span class='add'>that are</span> weary? 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_16">16&#160;</span> And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.
<span class="verse" id="JG8_17">17&#160;</span> And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men <span class='add'>were they</span> whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou <span class='add'>art</span>, so <span class='add'>were</span> they; each one resembled the children of a king.
<span class="verse" id="JG8_19">19&#160;</span> And he said, They <span class='add'>were</span> my brethren, <span class='add'>even</span> the sons of my mother: <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_20">20&#160;</span> And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, <span class='add'>and</span> slay them. But the youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he <span class='add'>was</span> yet a youth. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_21">21&#160;</span> Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man <span class='add'>is, so is</span> his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that <span class='add'>were</span> on their camels’ necks.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son also: for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_23">23&#160;</span> And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall rule over you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had golden earrings, because they <span class='add'>were</span> Ishmaelites.) 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_25">25&#160;</span> And they answered, We will willingly give <span class='add'>them</span>. And they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_26">26&#160;</span> And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of gold; beside ornaments, and collars, and purple raiment that <span class='add'>was</span> on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that <span class='add'>were</span> about their camels’ necks.
<span class="verse" id="JG8_27">27&#160;</span> And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, <span class='add'>even</span> in Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness forty years in the days of Gideon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_30">30&#160;</span> And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for he had many wives.
<span class="verse" id="JG8_31">31&#160;</span> And his concubine that <span class='add'>was</span> in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose name he called Abimelech.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG8_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abi-ezrites. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_33">33&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal-berith their god. 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_34">34&#160;</span> And the children of Israel remembered not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side: 
<span class="verse" id="JG8_35">35&#160;</span> Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, <span class='add'>namely</span>, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_1">1&#160;</span> And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his mother’s brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother’s father, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_2">2&#160;</span> Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether <span class='add'>is</span> better for you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, <span class='add'>which are</span> threescore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I <span class='add'>am</span> your bone and your flesh.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_3">3&#160;</span> And his mother’s brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech; for they said, He <span class='add'>is</span> our brother.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_4">4&#160;</span> And they gave him threescore and ten <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver out of the house of Baal-berith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_5">5&#160;</span> And he went unto his father’s house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, <span class='add'>being</span> threescore and ten persons, upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left; for he hid himself. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_6">6&#160;</span> And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar that <span class='add'>was</span> in Shechem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And when they told <span class='add'>it</span> to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them, Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_8">8&#160;</span> The trees went forth <span class='add'>on a time</span> to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_9">9&#160;</span> But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?
<span class="verse" id="JG9_10">10&#160;</span> And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, <span class='add'>and</span> reign over us. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_11">11&#160;</span> But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees? 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_12">12&#160;</span> Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, <span class='add'>and</span> reign over us. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_13">13&#160;</span> And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees? 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_14">14&#160;</span> Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, <span class='add'>and</span> reign over us.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_15">15&#160;</span> And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, <span class='add'>then</span> come <span class='add'>and</span> put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_16">16&#160;</span> Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands; 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_17">17&#160;</span>(For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian:
<span class="verse" id="JG9_18">18&#160;</span> And ye are risen up against my father’s house this day, and have slain his sons, threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he <span class='add'>is</span> your brother;) 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_19">19&#160;</span> If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, <span class='add'>then</span> rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you: 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_20">20&#160;</span> But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_21">21&#160;</span> And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_22">22&#160;</span>¶ When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_23">23&#160;</span> Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech: 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_24">24&#160;</span> That the cruelty <span class='add'>done</span> to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come, and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his brethren.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_25">25&#160;</span> And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them: and it was told Abimelech. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_26">26&#160;</span> And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_27">27&#160;</span> And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode <span class='add'>the grapes</span>, and made merry, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_28">28&#160;</span> And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who <span class='add'>is</span> Abimelech, and who <span class='add'>is</span> Shechem, that we should serve him? <span class='add'>is</span> not <span class='add'>he</span> the son of Jerubbaal? and Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for why should we serve him? 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_29">29&#160;</span> And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_31">31&#160;</span> And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they fortify the city against thee.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_32">32&#160;</span> Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that <span class='add'>is</span> with thee, and lie in wait in the field: 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_33">33&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city: and, behold, <span class='add'>when</span> he and the people that <span class='add'>is</span> with him come out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find occasion.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, by night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_35">35&#160;</span> And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, from lying in wait. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_36">36&#160;</span> And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as <span class='add'>if they were</span> men. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_37">37&#160;</span> And Gaal spake again and said, See there come people down by the middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_38">38&#160;</span> Then said Zebul unto him, Where <span class='add'>is</span> now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, Who <span class='add'>is</span> Abimelech, that we should serve him? <span class='add'>is</span> not this the people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_39">39&#160;</span> And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_40">40&#160;</span> And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were overthrown <span class='add'>and</span> wounded, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the entering of the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_41">41&#160;</span> And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_42">42&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field; and they told Abimelech. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_43">43&#160;</span> And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people <span class='add'>were</span> come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_44">44&#160;</span> And Abimelech, and the company that <span class='add'>was</span> with him, rushed forward, and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two <span class='add'>other</span> companies ran upon all <span class='add'>the people</span> that <span class='add'>were</span> in the fields, and slew them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_45">45&#160;</span> And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took the city, and slew the people that <span class='add'>was</span> therein, and beat down the city, and sowed it with salt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_46">46&#160;</span>¶ And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard <span class='add'>that</span>, they entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_47">47&#160;</span> And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_48">48&#160;</span> And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> on his shoulder, and said unto the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, What ye have seen me do, make haste, <span class='add'>and</span> do as I <span class='add'>have done</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JG9_49">49&#160;</span> And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put <span class='add'>them</span> to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_50">50&#160;</span>¶ Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_51">51&#160;</span> But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut <span class='add'>it</span> to them, and gat them up to the top of the tower. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_52">52&#160;</span> And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_53">53&#160;</span> And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech’s head, and all to brake his skull. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_54">54&#160;</span> Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A woman slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died. 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_55">55&#160;</span> And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG9_56">56&#160;</span>¶ Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 
<span class="verse" id="JG9_57">57&#160;</span> And all the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG10_1">1&#160;</span> And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim.
<span class="verse" id="JG10_2">2&#160;</span> And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG10_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years. 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_4">4&#160;</span> And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havoth-jair unto this day, which <span class='add'>are</span> in the land of Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="JG10_5">5&#160;</span> And Jair died, and was buried in Camon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG10_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and served not him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_7">7&#160;</span> And the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_8">8&#160;</span> And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel: eighteen years, all the children of Israel that <span class='add'>were</span> on the other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Gilead.
<span class="verse" id="JG10_9">9&#160;</span> Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distressed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG10_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, We have sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Baalim. 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_11">11&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto the children of Israel, <span class='add'>Did</span> not <span class='add'>I deliver you</span> from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_12">12&#160;</span> The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_13">13&#160;</span> Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will deliver you no more. 
<span class="verse" id="JG10_14">14&#160;</span> Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG10_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel said unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, We have sinned: do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we pray thee, this day.
<span class="verse" id="JG10_16">16&#160;</span> And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JG10_17">17&#160;</span> Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh.
<span class="verse" id="JG10_18">18&#160;</span> And the people <span class='add'>and</span> princes of Gilead said one to another, What man <span class='add'>is he</span> that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG11_1">1&#160;</span> Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he <span class='add'>was</span> the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah.
<span class="verse" id="JG11_2">2&#160;</span> And Gilead’s wife bare him sons; and his wife’s sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father’s house; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> the son of a strange woman. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_3">3&#160;</span> Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG11_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war against Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JG11_5">5&#160;</span> And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob: 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_6">6&#160;</span> And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_7">7&#160;</span> And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father’s house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distress? 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_8">8&#160;</span> And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_9">9&#160;</span> And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> deliver them before me, shall I be your head? 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_10">10&#160;</span> And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be witness between us, if we do not so according to thy words.
<span class="verse" id="JG11_11">11&#160;</span> Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his words before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Mizpeh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG11_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land? 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_13">13&#160;</span> And the king of the children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those <span class='add'>lands</span> again peaceably. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_14">14&#160;</span> And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon: 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_15">15&#160;</span> And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon: 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_16">16&#160;</span> But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh; 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_17">17&#160;</span> Then Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken <span class='add'>thereto</span>. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not <span class='add'>consent:</span> and Israel abode in Kadesh. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_18">18&#160;</span> Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon <span class='add'>was</span> the border of Moab. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_19">19&#160;</span> And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land into my place. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_20">20&#160;</span> But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_21">21&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_22">22&#160;</span> And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_23">23&#160;</span> So now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it? 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_24">24&#160;</span> Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to possess? So whomsoever the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God shall drive out from before us, them will we possess. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_25">25&#160;</span>And now <span class='add'>art</span> thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them, 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_26">26&#160;</span> While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that <span class='add'>be</span> along by the coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover <span class='add'>them</span> within that time? 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_27">27&#160;</span> Wherefore I have not sinned against thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the Judge be judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_28">28&#160;</span> Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG11_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Then the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over <span class='add'>unto</span> the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_30">30&#160;</span> And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_31">31&#160;</span> Then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall surely be the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG11_32">32&#160;</span>¶ So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight against them; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered them into his hands. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_33">33&#160;</span> And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, <span class='add'>even</span> twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the children of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG11_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she <span class='add'>was his</span> only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter.
<span class="verse" id="JG11_35">35&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and I cannot go back. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_36">36&#160;</span> And she said unto him, My father, <span class='add'>if</span> thou hast opened thy mouth unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, <span class='add'>even</span> of the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_37">37&#160;</span> And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my fellows.
<span class="verse" id="JG11_38">38&#160;</span> And he said, Go. And he sent her away <span class='add'>for</span> two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains. 
<span class="verse" id="JG11_39">39&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her <span class='add'>according</span> to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,
<span class="verse" id="JG11_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG12_1">1&#160;</span> And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire.
<span class="verse" id="JG12_2">2&#160;</span> And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_3">3&#160;</span> And when I saw that ye delivered <span class='add'>me</span> not, I put my life in my hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me? 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_4">4&#160;</span> Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites <span class='add'>are</span> fugitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, <span class='add'>and</span> among the Manassites. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_5">5&#160;</span> And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was <span class='add'>so</span>, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay; 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_6">6&#160;</span> Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce <span class='add'>it</span> right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_7">7&#160;</span> And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in <span class='add'>one of</span> the cities of Gilead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG12_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And after him Ibzan of Beth-lehem judged Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_9">9&#160;</span> And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, <span class='add'>whom</span> he sent abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_10">10&#160;</span> Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Beth-lehem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG12_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_12">12&#160;</span> And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the country of Zebulun. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG12_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And after him Abdon the son of Hillel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG12_14">14&#160;</span> And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on threescore and ten ass colts: and he judged Israel eight years.
<span class="verse" id="JG12_15">15&#160;</span> And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG13_1">1&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG13_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Manoah; and his wife <span class='add'>was</span> barren, and bare not. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_3">3&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now, thou <span class='add'>art</span> barren, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_4">4&#160;</span> Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean <span class='add'>thing:</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_5">5&#160;</span> For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shall come on his head: for the child shall be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG13_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came unto me, and his countenance <span class='add'>was</span> like the countenance of an angel of God, very terrible: but I asked him not whence he <span class='add'>was</span>, neither told he me his name: 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_7">7&#160;</span> But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean <span class='add'>thing:</span> for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG13_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Then Manoah intreated the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, O my Lord, let the man of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child that shall be born. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_9">9&#160;</span> And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband <span class='add'>was</span> not with her. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_10">10&#160;</span> And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man hath appeared unto me, that came unto me the <span class='add'>other</span> day. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_11">11&#160;</span> And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he said, I <span class='add'>am</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_12">12&#160;</span> And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. How shall we order the child, and <span class='add'>how</span> shall we do unto him?
<span class="verse" id="JG13_13">13&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Manoah, Of all that I said unto the woman let her beware. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_14">14&#160;</span> She may not eat of any <span class='add'>thing</span> that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean <span class='add'>thing:</span> all that I commanded her let her observe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG13_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Manoah said unto the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I pray thee, let us detain thee, until we shall have made ready a kid for thee.
<span class="verse" id="JG13_16">16&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt offer a burnt offering, thou must offer it unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. For Manoah knew not that he <span class='add'>was</span> an angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_17">17&#160;</span> And Manoah said unto the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy name, that when thy sayings come to pass we may do thee honour? 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_18">18&#160;</span> And the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it <span class='add'>is</span> secret?
<span class="verse" id="JG13_19">19&#160;</span> So Manoah took a kid with a meat offering, and offered <span class='add'>it</span> upon a rock unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and <span class='add'>the angel</span> did wondrously; and Manoah and his wife looked on. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_20">20&#160;</span> For it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on <span class='add'>it</span>, and fell on their faces to the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_21">21&#160;</span> But the angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did no more appear to Manoah and to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he <span class='add'>was</span> an angel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_22">22&#160;</span> And Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_23">23&#160;</span> But his wife said unto him, If the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these <span class='add'>things</span>, nor would as at this time have told us <span class='add'>such things</span> as these. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG13_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the woman bare a son, and called his name Samson: and the child grew, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> blessed him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG13_25">25&#160;</span> And the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> began to move him at times in the camp of Dan between Zorah and Eshtaol.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG14_1">1&#160;</span> And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_2">2&#160;</span> And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now therefore get her for me to wife. 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_3">3&#160;</span> Then his father and his mother said unto him, <span class='add'>Is there</span> never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me well.
<span class="verse" id="JG14_4">4&#160;</span> But his father and his mother knew not that it <span class='add'>was</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he sought an occasion against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG14_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared against him.
<span class="verse" id="JG14_6">6&#160;</span> And the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid, and <span class='add'>he had</span> nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had done. 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_7">7&#160;</span> And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG14_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to see the carcase of the lion: and, behold, <span class='add'>there was</span> a swarm of bees and honey in the carcase of the lion. 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_9">9&#160;</span> And he took thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG14_10">10&#160;</span>¶ So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do. 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG14_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Samson said unto them, I will now put forth a riddle unto you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find <span class='add'>it</span> out, then I will give you thirty sheets and thirty change of garments:
<span class="verse" id="JG14_13">13&#160;</span> But if ye cannot declare <span class='add'>it</span> me, then shall ye give me thirty sheets and thirty change of garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.
<span class="verse" id="JG14_14">14&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days expound the riddle. 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_15">15&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson’s wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father’s house with fire: have ye called us to take that we have? <span class='add'>is it</span> not <span class='add'>so</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JG14_16">16&#160;</span> And Samson’s wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not: thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people, and hast not told <span class='add'>it</span> me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told <span class='add'>it</span> my father nor my mother, and shall I tell <span class='add'>it</span> thee? 
<span class="verse" id="JG14_17">17&#160;</span> And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon him: and she told the riddle to the children of her people.
<span class="verse" id="JG14_18">18&#160;</span> And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What <span class='add'>is</span> sweeter than honey? and what <span class='add'>is</span> stronger than a lion? And he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riddle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG14_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave change of garments unto them which expounded the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father’s house.
<span class="verse" id="JG14_20">20&#160;</span> But Samson’s wife was <span class='add'>given</span> to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_1">1&#160;</span> But it came to pass within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I will go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suffer him to go in. 
<span class="verse" id="JG15_2">2&#160;</span> And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst utterly hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: <span class='add'>is</span> not her younger sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thee, instead of her.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Samson said concerning them, Now shall I be more blameless than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_4">4&#160;</span> And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between two tails.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_5">5&#160;</span> And when he had set the brands on fire, he let <span class='add'>them</span> go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards <span class='add'>and</span> olives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered, Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet will I be avenged of you, and after that I will cease. 
<span class="verse" id="JG15_8">8&#160;</span> And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi. 
<span class="verse" id="JG15_10">10&#160;</span> And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done to us. 
<span class="verse" id="JG15_11">11&#160;</span> Then three thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines <span class='add'>are</span> rulers over us? what <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast done unto us? And he said unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_12">12&#160;</span> And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said unto them, Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves. 
<span class="verse" id="JG15_13">13&#160;</span> And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we will bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand: but surely we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the rock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_14">14&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him: and the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came mightily upon him, and the cords that <span class='add'>were</span> upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands loosed from off his hands.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_15">15&#160;</span> And he found a new jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand, and took it, and slew a thousand men therewith.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_16">16&#160;</span> And Samson said, With the jawbone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I slain a thousand men.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_17">17&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and called that place Ramath-lehi.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG15_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And he was sore athirst, and called on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised? 
<span class="verse" id="JG15_19">19&#160;</span> But God clave an hollow place that <span class='add'>was</span> in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he called the name thereof En-hakkore, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Lehi unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="JG15_20">20&#160;</span> And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_1">1&#160;</span> Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And it was told</span> the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they compassed <span class='add'>him</span> in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, In the morning, when it is day, we shall kill him.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_3">3&#160;</span> And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and took the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with them, bar and all, and put <span class='add'>them</span> upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of an hill that <span class='add'>is</span> before Hebron.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Delilah.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_5">5&#160;</span> And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her, Entice him, and see wherein his great strength <span class='add'>lieth</span>, and by what <span class='add'>means</span> we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him: and we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred <span class='add'>pieces</span> of silver.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength <span class='add'>lieth</span>, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to afflict thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_7">7&#160;</span> And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven green withs that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_8">8&#160;</span> Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withs which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_9">9&#160;</span>Now <span class='add'>there were</span> men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, The Philistines <span class='add'>be</span> upon thee, Samson. And he brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_10">10&#160;</span> And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: now tell me, I pray thee, wherewith thou mightest be bound. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_11">11&#160;</span> And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that never were occupied, then shall I be weak, and be as another man.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_12">12&#160;</span> Delilah therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him, The Philistines <span class='add'>be</span> upon thee, Samson. And <span class='add'>there were</span> liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from off his arms like a thread. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_13">13&#160;</span> And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: tell me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_14">14&#160;</span> And she fastened <span class='add'>it</span> with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines <span class='add'>be</span> upon thee, Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thee, when thine heart <span class='add'>is</span> not with me? thou hast mocked me these three times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength <span class='add'>lieth</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, <span class='add'>so</span> that his soul was vexed unto death;
<span class="verse" id="JG16_17">17&#160;</span> That he told her all his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor upon mine head; for I <span class='add'>have been</span> a Nazarite unto God from my mother’s womb: if I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any <span class='add'>other</span> man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_18">18&#160;</span> And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_19">19&#160;</span> And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man, and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_20">20&#160;</span> And she said, The Philistines <span class='add'>be</span> upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before, and shake myself. And he wist not that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was departed from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_21">21&#160;</span>¶ But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in the prison house.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG16_22">22&#160;</span> Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_23">23&#160;</span> Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_24">24&#160;</span> And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew many of us.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_25">25&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him between the pillars.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_26">26&#160;</span> And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I may lean upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_27">27&#160;</span> Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of the Philistines <span class='add'>were</span> there; and <span class='add'>there were</span> upon the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_28">28&#160;</span> And Samson called unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JG16_29">29&#160;</span> And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand, and of the other with his left.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_30">30&#160;</span> And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with <span class='add'>all his</span> might; and the house fell upon the lords, and upon all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> therein. So the dead which he slew at his death were more than <span class='add'>they</span> which he slew in his life.
<span class="verse" id="JG16_31">31&#160;</span> Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took him, and brought <span class='add'>him</span> up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG17_1">1&#160;</span> And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Micah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_2">2&#160;</span> And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver <span class='add'>is</span> with me; I took it. And his mother said, Blessed <span class='add'>be thou</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, my son. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_3">3&#160;</span> And when he had restored the eleven hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver to his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_4">4&#160;</span> Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took two hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house of Micah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_5">5&#160;</span> And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.
<span class="verse" id="JG17_6">6&#160;</span> In those days <span class='add'>there was</span> no king in Israel, <span class='add'>but</span> every man did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in his own eyes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG17_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And there was a young man out of Beth-lehem-judah of the family of Judah, who <span class='add'>was</span> a Levite, and he sojourned there. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_8">8&#160;</span> And the man departed out of the city from Beth-lehem-judah to sojourn where he could find <span class='add'>a place:</span> and he came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.
<span class="verse" id="JG17_9">9&#160;</span> And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto him, I <span class='add'>am</span> a Levite of Beth-lehem-judah, and I go to sojourn where I may find <span class='add'>a place</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_10">10&#160;</span> And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee ten <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in.
<span class="verse" id="JG17_11">11&#160;</span> And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_12">12&#160;</span> And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG17_13">13&#160;</span> Then said Micah, Now know I that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to <span class='add'>my</span> priest.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_1">1&#160;</span> In those days <span class='add'>there was</span> no king in Israel: and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto that day <span class='add'>all their</span> inheritance had not fallen unto them among the tribes of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_2">2&#160;</span> And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land: who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they lodged there.
<span class="verse" id="JG18_3">3&#160;</span>When they <span class='add'>were</span> by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him, Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this <span class='add'>place</span>? and what hast thou here? 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_4">4&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_5">5&#160;</span> And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_6">6&#160;</span> And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> your way wherein ye go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that <span class='add'>were</span> therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; and <span class='add'>there was</span> no magistrate in the land, that might put <span class='add'>them</span> to shame in <span class='add'>any</span> thing; and they <span class='add'>were</span> far from the Zidonians, and had no business with <span class='add'>any</span> man.
<span class="verse" id="JG18_8">8&#160;</span> And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their brethren said unto them, What <span class='add'>say</span> ye? 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_9">9&#160;</span> And they said, Arise, that we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it <span class='add'>is</span> very good: and <span class='add'>are</span> ye still? be not slothful to go, <span class='add'>and</span> to enter to possess the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_10">10&#160;</span> When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where <span class='add'>there is</span> no want of any thing that <span class='add'>is</span> in the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of war.
<span class="verse" id="JG18_12">12&#160;</span> And they went up, and pitched in Kirjath-jearim, in Judah: wherefore they called that place Mahaneh-dan unto this day: behold, <span class='add'>it is</span> behind Kirjath-jearim. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_13">13&#160;</span> And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_15">15&#160;</span> And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the house of Micah, and saluted him.
<span class="verse" id="JG18_16">16&#160;</span> And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war, which <span class='add'>were</span> of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_17">17&#160;</span> And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, <span class='add'>and</span> came in thither, <span class='add'>and</span> took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering of the gate with the six hundred men <span class='add'>that were</span> appointed with weapons of war. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_18">18&#160;</span> And these went into Micah’s house, and fetched the carved image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the priest unto them, What do ye? 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_19">19&#160;</span> And they said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: <span class='add'>is it</span> better for thee to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_20">20&#160;</span> And the priest’s heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_21">21&#160;</span> So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the carriage before them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men that <span class='add'>were</span> in the houses near to Micah’s house were gathered together, and overtook the children of Dan. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_23">23&#160;</span> And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with such a company?
<span class="verse" id="JG18_24">24&#160;</span> And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and what <span class='add'>is</span> this <span class='add'>that</span> ye say unto me, What aileth thee? 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_25">25&#160;</span> And the children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.
<span class="verse" id="JG18_26">26&#160;</span> And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that they <span class='add'>were</span> too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_27">27&#160;</span> And they took <span class='add'>the things</span> which Micah had made, and the priest which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people <span class='add'>that were</span> at quiet and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_28">28&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there was</span> no deliverer, because it <span class='add'>was</span> far from Zidon, and they had no business with <span class='add'>any</span> man; and it was in the valley that <span class='add'>lieth</span> by Beth-rehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_29">29&#160;</span> And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city <span class='add'>was</span> Laish at the first. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG18_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JG18_31">31&#160;</span> And they set them up Micah’s graven image, which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG19_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass in those days, when <span class='add'>there was</span> no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Beth-lehem-judah.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_2">2&#160;</span> And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from him unto her father’s house to Beth-lehem-judah, and was there four whole months.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_3">3&#160;</span> And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto her, <span class='add'>and</span> to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of asses: and she brought him into her father’s house: and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_4">4&#160;</span> And his father in law, the damsel’s father, retained him; and he abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG19_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel’s father said unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward go your way.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_6">6&#160;</span> And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together: for the damsel’s father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_7">7&#160;</span> And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him: therefore he lodged there again. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_8">8&#160;</span> And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart: and the damsel’s father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_9">9&#160;</span> And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father in law, the damsel’s father, said unto him, Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_10">10&#160;</span> But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against Jebus, which <span class='add'>is</span> Jerusalem; and <span class='add'>there were</span> with him two asses saddled, his concubine also <span class='add'>was</span> with him.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> when they <span class='add'>were</span> by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_12">12&#160;</span> And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into the city of a stranger, that <span class='add'>is</span> not of the children of Israel; we will pass over to Gibeah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_13">13&#160;</span> And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_14">14&#160;</span> And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them <span class='add'>when they were</span> by Gibeah, which <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_15">15&#160;</span> And they turned aside thither, to go in <span class='add'>and</span> to lodge in Gibeah: and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for <span class='add'>there was</span> no man that took them into his house to lodging. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG19_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even, which <span class='add'>was</span> also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gibeah: but the men of the place <span class='add'>were</span> Benjamites. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_17">17&#160;</span> And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou? 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_18">18&#160;</span> And he said unto him, We <span class='add'>are</span> passing from Beth-lehem-judah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence <span class='add'>am</span> I: and I went to Beth-lehem-judah, but I <span class='add'>am now</span> going to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and there <span class='add'>is</span> no man that receiveth me to house.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_19">19&#160;</span> Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man <span class='add'>which is</span> with thy servants: <span class='add'>there is</span> no want of any thing. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_20">20&#160;</span> And the old man said, Peace <span class='add'>be</span> with thee; howsoever <span class='add'>let</span> all thy wants <span class='add'>lie</span> upon me; only lodge not in the street. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_21">21&#160;</span> So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG19_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Now</span> as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, <span class='add'>and</span> beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_23">23&#160;</span> And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, Nay, my brethren, <span class='add'>nay</span>, I pray you, do not <span class='add'>so</span> wickedly; seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_24">24&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>here is</span> my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing.
<span class="verse" id="JG19_25">25&#160;</span> But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_26">26&#160;</span> Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man’s house where her lord <span class='add'>was</span>, till it was light. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_27">27&#160;</span> And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the house, and her hands <span class='add'>were</span> upon the threshold. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_28">28&#160;</span> And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none answered. Then the man took her <span class='add'>up</span> upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him unto his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG19_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, <span class='add'>together</span> with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG19_30">30&#160;</span> And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and speak <span class='add'>your minds</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG20_1">1&#160;</span> Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, with the land of Gilead, unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Mizpeh. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_2">2&#160;</span> And the chief of all the people, <span class='add'>even</span> of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_3">3&#160;</span>(Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell <span class='add'>us</span>, how was this wickedness? 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_4">4&#160;</span> And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_5">5&#160;</span> And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me by night, <span class='add'>and</span> thought to have slain me: and my concubine have they forced, that she is dead.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_6">6&#160;</span> And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_7">7&#160;</span>Behold, ye <span class='add'>are</span> all children of Israel; give here your advice and counsel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG20_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any <span class='add'>of us</span> go to his tent, neither will we any <span class='add'>of us</span> turn into his house. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_9">9&#160;</span>But now this <span class='add'>shall be</span> the thing which we will do to Gibeah; <span class='add'>we will go up</span> by lot against it; 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_10">10&#160;</span> And we will take ten men of an hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_11">11&#160;</span> So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG20_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness <span class='add'>is</span> this that is done among you? 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_13">13&#160;</span> Now therefore deliver <span class='add'>us</span> the men, the children of Belial, which <span class='add'>are</span> in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_14">14&#160;</span> But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_15">15&#160;</span> And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_16">16&#160;</span> Among all this people <span class='add'>there were</span> seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair <span class='add'>breadth</span>, and not miss. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_17">17&#160;</span> And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these <span class='add'>were</span> men of war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG20_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Judah <span class='add'>shall go up</span> first. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_19">19&#160;</span> And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_20">20&#160;</span> And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at Gibeah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_21">21&#160;</span> And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_22">22&#160;</span> And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in array the first day. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_23">23&#160;</span>(And the children of Israel went up and wept before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> until even, and asked counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, saying, Shall I go up again to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Go up against him.) 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_24">24&#160;</span> And the children of Israel came near against the children of Benjamin the second day. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_25">25&#160;</span> And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG20_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up, and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_27">27&#160;</span> And the children of Israel enquired of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, (for the ark of the covenant of God <span class='add'>was</span> there in those days, 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_28">28&#160;</span> And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days,) saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Go up; for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_29">29&#160;</span> And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_30">30&#160;</span> And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_31">31&#160;</span> And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, <span class='add'>and</span> were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people, <span class='add'>and</span> kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_32">32&#160;</span> And the children of Benjamin said, They <span class='add'>are</span> smitten down before us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw them from the city unto the highways. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_33">33&#160;</span> And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in array at Baal-tamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, <span class='add'>even</span> out of the meadows of Gibeah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_34">34&#160;</span> And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil <span class='add'>was</span> near them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_35">35&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand and an hundred men: all these drew the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_36">36&#160;</span> So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_37">37&#160;</span> And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers in wait drew <span class='add'>themselves</span> along, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_38">38&#160;</span> Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise up out of the city.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_39">39&#160;</span> And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began to smite <span class='add'>and</span> kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as <span class='add'>in</span> the first battle.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_40">40&#160;</span> But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the flame of the city ascended up to heaven.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_41">41&#160;</span> And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_42">42&#160;</span> Therefore they turned <span class='add'>their backs</span> before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them which <span class='add'>came</span> out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Thus</span> they inclosed the Benjamites round about, <span class='add'>and</span> chased them, <span class='add'>and</span> trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the sunrising.
<span class="verse" id="JG20_44">44&#160;</span> And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these <span class='add'>were</span> men of valour. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_45">45&#160;</span> And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_46">46&#160;</span> So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand men that drew the sword; all these <span class='add'>were</span> men of valour. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_47">47&#160;</span> But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months. 
<span class="verse" id="JG20_48">48&#160;</span> And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men of <span class='add'>every</span> city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set on fire all the cities that they came to.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JG21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG21_1">1&#160;</span> Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_2">2&#160;</span> And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_3">3&#160;</span> And said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_4">4&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_5">5&#160;</span> And the children of Israel said, Who <span class='add'>is there</span> among all the tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_6">6&#160;</span> And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_7">7&#160;</span> How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have sworn by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that we will not give them of our daughters to wives? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG21_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And they said, What one <span class='add'>is there</span> of the tribes of Israel that came not up to Mizpeh to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabesh-gilead to the assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_9">9&#160;</span> For the people were numbered, and, behold, <span class='add'>there were</span> none of the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_10">10&#160;</span> And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the children. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_11">11&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man.
<span class="verse" id="JG21_12">12&#160;</span> And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male: and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Canaan.
<span class="verse" id="JG21_13">13&#160;</span> And the whole congregation sent <span class='add'>some</span> to speak to the children of Benjamin that <span class='add'>were</span> in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto them.
<span class="verse" id="JG21_14">14&#160;</span> And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives which they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh-gilead: and yet so they sufficed them not. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_15">15&#160;</span> And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made a breach in the tribes of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JG21_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin? 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_17">17&#160;</span> And they said, <span class='add'>There must be</span> an inheritance for them that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_18">18&#160;</span> Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> he that giveth a wife to Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_19">19&#160;</span> Then they said, Behold, <span class='add'>there is</span> a feast of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Shiloh yearly <span class='add'>in a place</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> on the north side of Beth-el, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Beth-el to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.
<span class="verse" id="JG21_20">20&#160;</span> Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards; 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_21">21&#160;</span> And see, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_22">22&#160;</span> And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, <span class='add'>that</span> ye should be guilty.
<span class="verse" id="JG21_23">23&#160;</span> And the children of Benjamin did so, and took <span class='add'>them</span> wives, according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the cities, and dwelt in them. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_24">24&#160;</span> And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man to his inheritance. 
<span class="verse" id="JG21_25">25&#160;</span> In those days <span class='add'>there was</span> no king in Israel: every man did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in his own eyes. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
