<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Jonah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Jonah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH4_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JH0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Jonah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JH1_1">1&#160;</span> Now the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JH1_2">2&#160;</span> Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_3">3&#160;</span> But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH1_4">4&#160;</span>¶ But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.
<span class="verse" id="JH1_5">5&#160;</span> Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and cast forth the wares that <span class='add'>were</span> in the ship into the sea, to lighten <span class='add'>it</span> of them. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_6">6&#160;</span> So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_7">7&#160;</span> And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil <span class='add'>is</span> upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_8">8&#160;</span> Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil <span class='add'>is</span> upon us; What <span class='add'>is</span> thine occupation? and whence comest thou? what <span class='add'>is</span> thy country? and of what people <span class='add'>art</span> thou? 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto them, I <span class='add'>am</span> an Hebrew; and I fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry <span class='add'>land</span>.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_10">10&#160;</span> Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because he had told them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH1_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.
<span class="verse" id="JH1_12">12&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest <span class='add'>is</span> upon you. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_13">13&#160;</span> Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring <span class='add'>it</span> to the land; but they could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.
<span class="verse" id="JH1_14">14&#160;</span> Wherefore they cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, We beseech thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, hast done as it pleased thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_15">15&#160;</span> So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging.
<span class="verse" id="JH1_16">16&#160;</span> Then the men feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and made vows.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH1_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH2_1">1&#160;</span> Then Jonah prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God out of the fish’s belly, 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_2">2&#160;</span> And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, <span class='add'>and</span> thou heardest my voice.
<span class="verse" id="JH2_3">3&#160;</span> For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas; and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed over me.
<span class="verse" id="JH2_4">4&#160;</span> Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy holy temple. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_5">5&#160;</span> The waters compassed me about, <span class='add'>even</span> to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_6">6&#160;</span> I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars <span class='add'>was</span> about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God.
<span class="verse" id="JH2_7">7&#160;</span> When my soul fainted within me I remembered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and my prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_8">8&#160;</span> They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_9">9&#160;</span> But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay <span class='add'>that</span> that I have vowed. Salvation <span class='add'>is</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry <span class='add'>land</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH3_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jonah the second time, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_2">2&#160;</span> Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_3">3&#160;</span> So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days’ journey.
<span class="verse" id="JH3_4">4&#160;</span> And Jonah began to enter into the city a day’s journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_6">6&#160;</span> For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered <span class='add'>him</span> with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_7">7&#160;</span>And he caused <span class='add'>it</span> to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water:
<span class="verse" id="JH3_8">8&#160;</span> But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that <span class='add'>is</span> in their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_9">9&#160;</span> Who can tell <span class='add'>if</span> God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH3_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did <span class='add'>it</span> not.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH4_1">1&#160;</span> But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_2">2&#160;</span> And he prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, I pray thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>was</span> not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou <span class='add'>art</span> a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for <span class='add'>it is</span> better for me to die than to live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Doest thou well to be angry?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH4_5">5&#160;</span> So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see what would become of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God prepared a gourd, and made <span class='add'>it</span> to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.
<span class="verse" id="JH4_7">7&#160;</span> But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, <span class='add'>It is</span> better for me to die than to live.
<span class="verse" id="JH4_9">9&#160;</span> And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, <span class='add'>even</span> unto death.
<span class="verse" id="JH4_10">10&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night:
<span class="verse" id="JH4_11">11&#160;</span> And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and <span class='add'>also</span> much cattle? </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
