<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Joshua 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Joshua</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='JOS.xhtml#JS24_0'>24</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JS0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Joshua  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JS1_1">1&#160;</span> Now after the death of Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> it came to pass, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses’ minister, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS1_2">2&#160;</span> Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give to them, <span class='add'>even</span> to the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_3">3&#160;</span> Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_4">4&#160;</span> From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_5">5&#160;</span> There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, <span class='add'>so</span> I will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_6">6&#160;</span> Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_7">7&#160;</span> Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it <span class='add'>to</span> the right hand or <span class='add'>to</span> the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_8">8&#160;</span> This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_9">9&#160;</span> Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God <span class='add'>is</span> with thee whithersoever thou goest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS1_11">11&#160;</span> Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God giveth you to possess it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS1_13">13&#160;</span> Remember the word which Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded you, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_14">14&#160;</span> Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help them;
<span class="verse" id="JS1_15">15&#160;</span> Until the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> have given your brethren rest, as <span class='add'>he hath given</span> you, and they also have possessed the land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS1_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_17">17&#160;</span> According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
<span class="verse" id="JS1_18">18&#160;</span> Whosoever <span class='add'>he be</span> that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS2_1">1&#160;</span> And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an harlot’s house, named Rahab, and lodged there.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_2">2&#160;</span> And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the country.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_3">3&#160;</span> And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for they be come to search out all the country.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_4">4&#160;</span> And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they <span class='add'>were:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JS2_5">5&#160;</span>And it came to pass <span class='add'>about the time</span> of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shall overtake them.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_6">6&#160;</span> But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_7">7&#160;</span> And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS2_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the roof;
<span class="verse" id="JS2_9">9&#160;</span> And she said unto the men, I know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_10">10&#160;</span> For we have heard how the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that <span class='add'>were</span> on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_11">11&#160;</span> And as soon as we had heard <span class='add'>these things</span>, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, he <span class='add'>is</span> God in heaven above, and in earth beneath.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_12">12&#160;</span> Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, since I have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my father’s house, and give me a true token:
<span class="verse" id="JS2_13">13&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and deliver our lives from death.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_14">14&#160;</span> And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not this our business. And it shall be, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_15">15&#160;</span> Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house <span class='add'>was</span> upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_16">16&#160;</span> And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_17">17&#160;</span> And the men said unto her, We <span class='add'>will be</span> blameless of this thine oath which thou hast made us swear.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>when</span> we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy father’s household, home unto thee.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_19">19&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon his head, and we <span class='add'>will be</span> guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> on our head, if <span class='add'>any</span> hand be upon him.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_20">20&#160;</span> And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear.
<span class="verse" id="JS2_21">21&#160;</span> And she said, According unto your words, so <span class='add'>be</span> it. And she sent them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS2_22">22&#160;</span> And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought <span class='add'>them</span> throughout all the way, but found <span class='add'>them</span> not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS2_23">23&#160;</span>¶ So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all <span class='add'>things</span> that befell them:
<span class="verse" id="JS2_24">24&#160;</span> And they said unto Joshua, Truly the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the inhabitants of the country do faint because of us.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS3_1">1&#160;</span> And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the host;
<span class="verse" id="JS3_3">3&#160;</span> And they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after it.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_4">4&#160;</span> Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not passed <span class='add'>this</span> way heretofore.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_5">5&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will do wonders among you.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_6">6&#160;</span> And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, <span class='add'>so</span> I will be with thee.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS3_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_10">10&#160;</span> And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God <span class='add'>is</span> among you, and <span class='add'>that</span> he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_11">11&#160;</span> Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth over before you into Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_12">12&#160;</span> Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_13">13&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, <span class='add'>that</span> the waters of Jordan shall be cut off <span class='add'>from</span> the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand upon an heap. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS3_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people;
<span class="verse" id="JS3_15">15&#160;</span> And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest,)
<span class="verse" id="JS3_16">16&#160;</span> That the waters which came down from above stood <span class='add'>and</span> rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that <span class='add'>is</span> beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, <span class='add'>even</span> the salt sea, failed, <span class='add'>and</span> were cut off: and the people passed over right against Jericho.
<span class="verse" id="JS3_17">17&#160;</span> And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed clean over Jordan.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS4_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over Jordan, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Joshua, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS4_2">2&#160;</span> Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man,
<span class="verse" id="JS4_3">3&#160;</span> And command ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place where the priests’ feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where ye shall lodge this night.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_4">4&#160;</span> Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man:
<span class="verse" id="JS4_5">5&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto them, Pass over before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God into the midst of Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel:
<span class="verse" id="JS4_6">6&#160;</span> That this may be a sign among you, <span class='add'>that</span> when your children ask <span class='add'>their fathers</span> in time to come, saying, What <span class='add'>mean</span> ye by these stones?
<span class="verse" id="JS4_7">7&#160;</span> Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; when it passed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_8">8&#160;</span> And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down there.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_9">9&#160;</span> And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stood: and they are there unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS4_10">10&#160;</span>¶ For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until every thing was finished that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Joshua to speak unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the people hasted and passed over.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_12">12&#160;</span> And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them:
<span class="verse" id="JS4_13">13&#160;</span> About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto battle, to the plains of Jericho.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS4_14">14&#160;</span>¶ On that day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Joshua, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS4_16">16&#160;</span> Command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_17">17&#160;</span> Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> were come up out of the midst of Jordan, <span class='add'>and</span> the soles of the priests’ feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his banks, as <span class='add'>they did</span> before.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS4_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS4_20">20&#160;</span> And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_21">21&#160;</span> And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What <span class='add'>mean</span> these stones?
<span class="verse" id="JS4_22">22&#160;</span> Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.
<span class="verse" id="JS4_23">23&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over:
<span class="verse" id="JS4_24">24&#160;</span> That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that it <span class='add'>is</span> mighty: that ye might fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God for ever.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS5_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which <span class='add'>were</span> on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, which <span class='add'>were</span> by the sea, heard that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS5_2">2&#160;</span>¶ At that time the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_3">3&#160;</span> And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_4">4&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people that came out of Egypt, <span class='add'>that were</span> males, <span class='add'>even</span> all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_5">5&#160;</span> Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the people <span class='add'>that were</span> born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, <span class='add'>them</span> they had not circumcised.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_6">6&#160;</span> For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness, till all the people <span class='add'>that were</span> men of war, which came out of Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: unto whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware that he would not shew them the land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk and honey.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_7">7&#160;</span> And their children, <span class='add'>whom</span> he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were whole.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_9">9&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS5_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho.
<span class="verse" id="JS5_11">11&#160;</span> And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched <span class='add'>corn</span> in the selfsame day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS5_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS5_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, <span class='add'>Art</span> thou for us, or for our adversaries?
<span class="verse" id="JS5_14">14&#160;</span> And he said, Nay; but <span class='add'>as</span> captain of the host of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my lord unto his servant?
<span class="verse" id="JS5_15">15&#160;</span> And the captain of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest <span class='add'>is</span> holy. And Joshua did so.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_1">1&#160;</span> Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, <span class='add'>and</span> the mighty men of valour.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_3">3&#160;</span> And ye shall compass the city, all <span class='add'>ye</span> men of war, <span class='add'>and</span> go round about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_4">4&#160;</span> And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams’ horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_5">5&#160;</span> And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long <span class='add'>blast</span> with the ram’s horn, <span class='add'>and</span> when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight before him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_7">7&#160;</span> And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams’ horns passed on before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> followed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, <span class='add'>the priests</span> going on, and blowing with the trumpets.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_10">10&#160;</span> And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall <span class='add'>any</span> word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_11">11&#160;</span> So the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> compassed the city, going about <span class='add'>it</span> once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_13">13&#160;</span> And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> went on continually, and blew with the trumpets: and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>the priests</span> going on, and blowing with the trumpets.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_14">14&#160;</span> And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned into the camp: so they did six days.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_15">15&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven times.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given you the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the city shall be accursed, <span class='add'>even</span> it, and all that <span class='add'>are</span> therein, to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that <span class='add'>are</span> with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_18">18&#160;</span> And ye, in any wise keep <span class='add'>yourselves</span> from the accursed thing, lest ye make <span class='add'>yourselves</span> accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_19">19&#160;</span> But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, <span class='add'>are</span> consecrated unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: they shall come into the treasury of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_20">20&#160;</span> So the people shouted when <span class='add'>the priests</span> blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_21">21&#160;</span> And they utterly destroyed all that <span class='add'>was</span> in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_22">22&#160;</span> But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot’s house, and bring out thence the woman, and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_23">23&#160;</span> And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the camp of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_24">24&#160;</span> And they burnt the city with fire, and all that <span class='add'>was</span> therein: only the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_25">25&#160;</span> And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father’s household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel <span class='add'>even</span> unto this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS6_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua adjured <span class='add'>them</span> at that time, saying, Cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the man before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest <span class='add'>son</span> shall he set up the gates of it.
<span class="verse" id="JS6_27">27&#160;</span> So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with Joshua; and his fame was <span class='add'>noised</span> throughout all the country.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS7_1">1&#160;</span> But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_2">2&#160;</span> And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which <span class='add'>is</span> beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_3">3&#160;</span> And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai; <span class='add'>and</span> make not all the people to labour thither; for they <span class='add'>are but</span> few.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_4">4&#160;</span> So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men: and they fled before the men of Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_5">5&#160;</span> And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them <span class='add'>from</span> before the gate <span class='add'>even</span> unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS7_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_7">7&#160;</span> And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span>, wherefore hast thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan!
<span class="verse" id="JS7_8">8&#160;</span> O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies!
<span class="verse" id="JS7_9">9&#160;</span> For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear <span class='add'>of it</span>, and shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS7_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?
<span class="verse" id="JS7_11">11&#160;</span> Israel hath sinned, and they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put <span class='add'>it</span> even among their own stuff.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, <span class='add'>but</span> turned <span class='add'>their</span> backs before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_13">13&#160;</span> Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to morrow: for thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, <span class='add'>There is</span> an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_14">14&#160;</span> In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your tribes: and it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> the tribe which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> taketh shall come according to the families <span class='add'>thereof;</span> and the family which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall take shall come by households; and the household which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall take shall come man by man.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_15">15&#160;</span>And it shall be, <span class='add'>that</span> he that is taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath transgressed the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and because he hath wrought folly in Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS7_16">16&#160;</span>¶ So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken:
<span class="verse" id="JS7_17">17&#160;</span> And he brought the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
<span class="verse" id="JS7_18">18&#160;</span> And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_19">19&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou hast done; hide <span class='add'>it</span> not from me.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_20">20&#160;</span> And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done:
<span class="verse" id="JS7_21">21&#160;</span> When I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them; and, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS7_22">22&#160;</span>¶ So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, <span class='add'>it was</span> hid in his tent, and the silver under it.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_23">23&#160;</span> And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_24">24&#160;</span> And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of Achor.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_25">25&#160;</span> And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.
<span class="verse" id="JS7_26">26&#160;</span> And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land:
<span class="verse" id="JS8_2">2&#160;</span> And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush for the city behind it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_3">3&#160;</span>¶ So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them away by night.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_4">4&#160;</span> And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait against the city, <span class='add'>even</span> behind the city: go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready:
<span class="verse" id="JS8_5">5&#160;</span> And I, and all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> with me, will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them,
<span class="verse" id="JS8_6">6&#160;</span>(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first: therefore we will flee before them.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_7">7&#160;</span> Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God will deliver it into your hand.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_8">8&#160;</span> And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, <span class='add'>that</span> ye shall set the city on fire: according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall ye do. See, I have commanded you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and abode between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_10">10&#160;</span> And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_11">11&#160;</span> And all the people, <span class='add'>even the people</span> of war that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now <span class='add'>there was</span> a valley between them and Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_12">12&#160;</span> And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of the city.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_13">13&#160;</span> And when they had set the people, <span class='add'>even</span> all the host that <span class='add'>was</span> on the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw <span class='add'>it</span>, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain; but he wist not that <span class='add'>there were</span> liers in ambush against him behind the city.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_15">15&#160;</span> And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_16">16&#160;</span> And all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> in Ai were called together to pursue after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_17">17&#160;</span> And there was not a man left in Ai or Beth-el, that went not out after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_18">18&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that <span class='add'>is</span> in thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that <span class='add'>he had</span> in his hand toward the city.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_19">19&#160;</span> And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city, and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_20">20&#160;</span> And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_21">21&#160;</span> And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_22">22&#160;</span> And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_23">23&#160;</span> And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_24">24&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_25">25&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>so</span> it was, <span class='add'>that</span> all that fell that day, both of men and women, <span class='add'>were</span> twelve thousand, <span class='add'>even</span> all the men of Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_26">26&#160;</span> For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_27">27&#160;</span> Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey unto themselves, according unto the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he commanded Joshua.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_28">28&#160;</span> And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, <span class='add'>even</span> a desolation unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_29">29&#160;</span> And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, <span class='add'>that remaineth</span> unto this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Then Joshua built an altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel in mount Ebal,
<span class="verse" id="JS8_31">31&#160;</span> As Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded the children of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up <span class='add'>any</span> iron: and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and sacrificed peace offerings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS8_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_33">33&#160;</span> And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had commanded before, that they should bless the people of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_34">34&#160;</span> And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
<span class="verse" id="JS8_35">35&#160;</span> There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS9_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when all the kings which <span class='add'>were</span> on this side Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard <span class='add'>thereof;</span>
<span class="verse" id="JS9_2">2&#160;</span> That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS9_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai,
<span class="verse" id="JS9_4">4&#160;</span> They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;
<span class="verse" id="JS9_5">5&#160;</span> And old shoes and clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision was dry <span class='add'>and</span> mouldy.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_6">6&#160;</span> And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make ye a league with us.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_7">7&#160;</span> And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell among us; and how shall we make a league with you?
<span class="verse" id="JS9_8">8&#160;</span> And they said unto Joshua, We <span class='add'>are</span> thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who <span class='add'>are</span> ye? and from whence come ye?
<span class="verse" id="JS9_9">9&#160;</span> And they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
<span class="verse" id="JS9_10">10&#160;</span> And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that <span class='add'>were</span> beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, which <span class='add'>was</span> at Ashtaroth.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_11">11&#160;</span> Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them, We <span class='add'>are</span> your servants: therefore now make ye a league with us.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_12">12&#160;</span> This our bread we took hot <span class='add'>for</span> our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy:
<span class="verse" id="JS9_13">13&#160;</span> And these bottles of wine, which we filled, <span class='add'>were</span> new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_14">14&#160;</span> And the men took of their victuals, and asked not <span class='add'>counsel</span> at the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS9_15">15&#160;</span> And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS9_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a league with them, that they heard that they <span class='add'>were</span> their neighbours, and <span class='add'>that</span> they dwelt among them.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_17">17&#160;</span> And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities <span class='add'>were</span> Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjath-jearim.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_18">18&#160;</span> And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the princes.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_19">19&#160;</span> But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_20">20&#160;</span> This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_21">21&#160;</span> And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the princes had promised them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS9_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We <span class='add'>are</span> very far from you; when ye dwell among us?
<span class="verse" id="JS9_23">23&#160;</span>Now therefore ye <span class='add'>are</span> cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_24">24&#160;</span> And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of you, and have done this thing.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_25">25&#160;</span> And now, behold, we <span class='add'>are</span> in thine hand: as it seemeth good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_26">26&#160;</span> And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them not.
<span class="verse" id="JS9_27">27&#160;</span> And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even unto this day, in the place which he should choose.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, when Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem had heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them;
<span class="verse" id="JS10_2">2&#160;</span> That they feared greatly, because Gibeon <span class='add'>was</span> a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it <span class='add'>was</span> greater than Ai, and all the men thereof <span class='add'>were</span> mighty.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_3">3&#160;</span> Wherefore Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS10_4">4&#160;</span> Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together against us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_7">7&#160;</span> So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand before thee.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_9">9&#160;</span> Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, <span class='add'>and</span> went up from Gilgal all night.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_10">10&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth up to Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_11">11&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, <span class='add'>and</span> were in the going down to Beth-horon, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: <span class='add'>they were</span> more which died with hailstones than <span class='add'>they</span> whom the children of Israel slew with the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then spake Joshua to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the day when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_13">13&#160;</span> And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. <span class='add'>Is</span> not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_14">14&#160;</span> And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fought for Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_16">16&#160;</span> But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_17">17&#160;</span> And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a cave at Makkedah.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_18">18&#160;</span> And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to keep them:
<span class="verse" id="JS10_19">19&#160;</span> And stay ye not, <span class='add'>but</span> pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to enter into their cities: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath delivered them into your hand.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_20">20&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest <span class='add'>which</span> remained of them entered into fenced cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_21">21&#160;</span> And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_22">22&#160;</span> Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_23">23&#160;</span> And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, <span class='add'>and</span> the king of Eglon.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_24">24&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_25">25&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_26">26&#160;</span> And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_27">27&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, <span class='add'>that</span> Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the cave’s mouth, <span class='add'>which remain</span> until this very day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_29">29&#160;</span> Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah:
<span class="verse" id="JS10_30">30&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it:
<span class="verse" id="JS10_32">32&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_33">33&#160;</span>¶ Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it:
<span class="verse" id="JS10_35">35&#160;</span> And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_36">36&#160;</span> And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it:
<span class="verse" id="JS10_37">37&#160;</span> And they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof, and all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein; he left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it utterly, and all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_38">38&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it:
<span class="verse" id="JS10_39">39&#160;</span> And he took it, and the king thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS10_40">40&#160;</span>¶ So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel commanded.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_41">41&#160;</span> And Joshua smote them from Kadesh-barnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_42">42&#160;</span> And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel fought for Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS10_43">43&#160;</span> And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS11_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard <span class='add'>those things</span>, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,
<span class="verse" id="JS11_2">2&#160;</span> And to the kings that <span class='add'>were</span> on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth, and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west,
<span class="verse" id="JS11_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And to</span> the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and <span class='add'>to</span> the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and <span class='add'>to</span> the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_4">4&#160;</span> And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_5">5&#160;</span> And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS11_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_7">7&#160;</span> So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_8">8&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephoth-maim, and unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_9">9&#160;</span> And Joshua did unto them as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS11_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of all those kingdoms.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_11">11&#160;</span> And they smote all the souls that <span class='add'>were</span> therein with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying <span class='add'>them:</span> there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_12">12&#160;</span> And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, <span class='add'>and</span> he utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_13">13&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for</span> the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only; <span class='add'>that</span> did Joshua burn.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_14">14&#160;</span> And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS11_15">15&#160;</span>¶ As the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_16">16&#160;</span> So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same;
<span class="verse" id="JS11_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and smote them, and slew them.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_18">18&#160;</span> Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_19">19&#160;</span> There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all <span class='add'>other</span> they took in battle.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_20">20&#160;</span> For it was of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, <span class='add'>and</span> that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS11_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with their cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_22">22&#160;</span> There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained.
<span class="verse" id="JS11_23">23&#160;</span> So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from war.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS12_1">1&#160;</span>Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the plain on the east:
<span class="verse" id="JS12_2">2&#160;</span> Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, <span class='add'>and</span> ruled from Aroer, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jabbok, <span class='add'>which is</span> the border of the children of Ammon;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_3">3&#160;</span> And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto the sea of the plain, <span class='add'>even</span> the salt sea on the east, the way to Beth-jeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdoth-pisgah:</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS12_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And the coast of Og king of Bashan, <span class='add'>which was</span> of the remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,
<span class="verse" id="JS12_5">5&#160;</span> And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
<span class="verse" id="JS12_6">6&#160;</span> Them did Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave it <span class='add'>for</span> a possession unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS12_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are</span> the kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel <span class='add'>for</span> a possession according to their divisions;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_8">8&#160;</span> In the mountains, and in the valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness, and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS12_9">9&#160;</span>¶ The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which <span class='add'>is</span> beside Beth-el, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_10">10&#160;</span> The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_11">11&#160;</span> The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_12">12&#160;</span> The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_13">13&#160;</span> The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_14">14&#160;</span> The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_15">15&#160;</span> The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_16">16&#160;</span> The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Beth-el, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_17">17&#160;</span> The king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_18">18&#160;</span> The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_19">19&#160;</span> The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_20">20&#160;</span> The king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_21">21&#160;</span> The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_22">22&#160;</span> The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_23">23&#160;</span> The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one;
<span class="verse" id="JS12_24">24&#160;</span> The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and one.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS13_1">1&#160;</span> Now Joshua was old <span class='add'>and</span> stricken in years; and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Thou art old <span class='add'>and</span> stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_2">2&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,
<span class="verse" id="JS13_3">3&#160;</span> From Sihor, which <span class='add'>is</span> before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, <span class='add'>which</span> is counted to the Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites:
<span class="verse" id="JS13_4">4&#160;</span> From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that <span class='add'>is</span> beside the Sidonians, unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites:
<span class="verse" id="JS13_5">5&#160;</span> And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baal-gad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_6">6&#160;</span> All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto Misrephoth-maim, <span class='add'>and</span> all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS13_7">7&#160;</span> Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh,
<span class="verse" id="JS13_8">8&#160;</span> With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, <span class='add'>even</span> as Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave them;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_9">9&#160;</span> From Aroer, that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of the river, and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_10">10&#160;</span> And all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Ammon;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_11">11&#160;</span> And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_12">12&#160;</span> All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_13">13&#160;</span> Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_14">14&#160;</span> Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel made by fire <span class='add'>are</span> their inheritance, as he said unto them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS13_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben <span class='add'>inheritance</span> according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_16">16&#160;</span> And their coast was from Aroer, that <span class='add'>is</span> on the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that <span class='add'>is</span> in the midst of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_17">17&#160;</span> Heshbon, and all her cities that <span class='add'>are</span> in the plain; Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon,
<span class="verse" id="JS13_18">18&#160;</span> And Jahazah, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,
<span class="verse" id="JS13_19">19&#160;</span> And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zareth-shahar in the mount of the valley,
<span class="verse" id="JS13_20">20&#160;</span> And Beth-peor, and Ashdoth-pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth,
<span class="verse" id="JS13_21">21&#160;</span> And all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, <span class='add'>which were</span> dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the country. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS13_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_23">23&#160;</span> And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border <span class='add'>thereof</span>. This <span class='add'>was</span> the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the villages thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_24">24&#160;</span> And Moses gave <span class='add'>inheritance</span> unto the tribe of Gad, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the children of Gad according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_25">25&#160;</span> And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that <span class='add'>is</span> before Rabbah;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_26">26&#160;</span> And from Heshbon unto Ramath-mizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;
<span class="verse" id="JS13_27">27&#160;</span> And in the valley, Beth-aram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and <span class='add'>his</span> border, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_28">28&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS13_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And Moses gave <span class='add'>inheritance</span> unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and <span class='add'>this</span> was <span class='add'>the possession</span> of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh by their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_30">30&#160;</span> And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which <span class='add'>are</span> in Bashan, threescore cities:
<span class="verse" id="JS13_31">31&#160;</span> And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, <span class='add'>were pertaining</span> unto the children of Machir the son of Manasseh, <span class='add'>even</span> to the one half of the children of Machir by their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_32">32&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are the countries</span> which Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.
<span class="verse" id="JS13_33">33&#160;</span> But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not <span class='add'>any</span> inheritance: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel <span class='add'>was</span> their inheritance, as he said unto them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS14_1">1&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are the countries</span> which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_2">2&#160;</span> By lot <span class='add'>was</span> their inheritance, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and <span class='add'>for</span> the half tribe.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_3">3&#160;</span> For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_4">4&#160;</span> For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell <span class='add'>in</span>, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their substance.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_5">5&#160;</span> As the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS14_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in Kadesh-barnea.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_7">7&#160;</span> Forty years old <span class='add'>was</span> I when Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent me from Kadesh-barnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again as <span class='add'>it was</span> in mine heart.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_8">8&#160;</span> Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I wholly followed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_9">9&#160;</span> And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children’s for ever, because thou hast wholly followed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_10">10&#160;</span> And now, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake this word unto Moses, while <span class='add'>the children of</span> Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo, I <span class='add'>am</span> this day fourscore and five years old.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_11">11&#160;</span>As yet I <span class='add'>am as</span> strong this day as <span class='add'>I was</span> in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength <span class='add'>was</span> then, even so <span class='add'>is</span> my strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_12">12&#160;</span> Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims <span class='add'>were</span> there, and <span class='add'>that</span> the cities <span class='add'>were</span> great <span class='add'>and</span> fenced: if so be the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>will be</span> with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_13">13&#160;</span> And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh Hebron for an inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_14">14&#160;</span> Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS14_15">15&#160;</span> And the name of Hebron before <span class='add'>was</span> Kirjath-arba; <span class='add'>which Arba was</span> a great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS15_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='add'>This</span> then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; <span class='add'>even</span> to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin southward <span class='add'>was</span> the uttermost part of the south coast.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_2">2&#160;</span> And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that looketh southward:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_3">3&#160;</span> And it went out to the south side to Maaleh-acrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadesh-barnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>From thence</span> it passed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_5">5&#160;</span> And the east border <span class='add'>was</span> the salt sea, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the end of Jordan. And <span class='add'>their</span> border in the north quarter <span class='add'>was</span> from the bay of the sea at the uttermost part of Jordan:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_6">6&#160;</span> And the border went up to Beth-hogla, and passed along by the north of Beth-arabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_7">7&#160;</span> And the border went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that <span class='add'>is</span> before the going up to Adummim, which <span class='add'>is</span> on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the waters of En-shemesh, and the goings out thereof were at En-rogel:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_8">8&#160;</span> And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the south side of the Jebusite; the same <span class='add'>is</span> Jerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that <span class='add'>lieth</span> before the valley of Hinnom westward, which <span class='add'>is</span> at the end of the valley of the giants northward:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_9">9&#160;</span> And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which <span class='add'>is</span> Kirjath-jearim:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_10">10&#160;</span> And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir, and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which <span class='add'>is</span> Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Beth-shemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_11">11&#160;</span> And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the sea.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_12">12&#160;</span> And the west border <span class='add'>was</span> to the great sea, and the coast <span class='add'>thereof</span>. This <span class='add'>is</span> the coast of the children of Judah round about according to their families. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS15_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the children of Judah, according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Joshua, <span class='add'>even</span> the city of Arba the father of Anak, which <span class='add'>city is</span> Hebron.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_14">14&#160;</span> And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_15">15&#160;</span> And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before <span class='add'>was</span> Kirjath-sepher. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS15_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_17">17&#160;</span> And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_18">18&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as she came <span class='add'>unto him</span>, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted off <span class='add'>her</span> ass; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest thou?
<span class="verse" id="JS15_19">19&#160;</span> Who answered, Give me a blessing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS15_20">20&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS15_21">21&#160;</span> And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_22">22&#160;</span> And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_23">23&#160;</span> And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_24">24&#160;</span> Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_25">25&#160;</span> And Hazor, Hadattah, and Kerioth, <span class='add'>and</span> Hezron, which <span class='add'>is</span> Hazor,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_26">26&#160;</span> Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_27">27&#160;</span> And Hazar-gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-palet,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_28">28&#160;</span> And Hazar-shual, and Beer-sheba, and Bizjothjah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_29">29&#160;</span> Baalah, and Iim, and Azem,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_30">30&#160;</span> And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_31">31&#160;</span> And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_32">32&#160;</span> And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities <span class='add'>are</span> twenty and nine, with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_34">34&#160;</span> And Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_35">35&#160;</span> Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_36">36&#160;</span> And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_37">37&#160;</span> Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-gad,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_38">38&#160;</span> And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_39">39&#160;</span> Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_40">40&#160;</span> And Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_41">41&#160;</span> And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_42">42&#160;</span> Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_43">43&#160;</span> And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_44">44&#160;</span> And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_45">45&#160;</span> Ekron, with her towns and her villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_46">46&#160;</span> From Ekron even unto the sea, all that <span class='add'>lay</span> near Ashdod, with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_47">47&#160;</span> Ashdod with her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border <span class='add'>thereof:</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS15_48">48&#160;</span>¶ And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_49">49&#160;</span> And Dannah, and Kirjath-sannah, which <span class='add'>is</span> Debir,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_50">50&#160;</span> And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_51">51&#160;</span> And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_52">52&#160;</span> Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_53">53&#160;</span> And Janum, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_54">54&#160;</span> And Humtah, and Kirjath-arba, which <span class='add'>is</span> Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_55">55&#160;</span> Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juttah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_56">56&#160;</span> And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_57">57&#160;</span> Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_58">58&#160;</span> Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_59">59&#160;</span> And Maarath, and Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_60">60&#160;</span> Kirjath-baal, which <span class='add'>is</span> Kirjath-jearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS15_61">61&#160;</span> In the wilderness, Beth-arabah, Middin, and Secacah,
<span class="verse" id="JS15_62">62&#160;</span> And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and En-gedi; six cities with their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS15_63">63&#160;</span>¶ As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS16_1">1&#160;</span> And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Beth-el,
<span class="verse" id="JS16_2">2&#160;</span> And goeth out from Beth-el to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
<span class="verse" id="JS16_3">3&#160;</span> And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Beth-horon the nether, and to Gezer: and the goings out thereof are at the sea.
<span class="verse" id="JS16_4">4&#160;</span> So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS16_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their families was <span class='add'>thus:</span> even the border of their inheritance on the east side was Ataroth-addar, unto Beth-horon the upper;
<span class="verse" id="JS16_6">6&#160;</span> And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward unto Taanath-shiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;
<span class="verse" id="JS16_7">7&#160;</span> And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="JS16_8">8&#160;</span> The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS16_9">9&#160;</span> And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim <span class='add'>were</span> among the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.
<span class="verse" id="JS16_10">10&#160;</span> And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS17_1">1&#160;</span> There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he <span class='add'>was</span> the firstborn of Joseph; <span class='add'>to wit</span>, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_2">2&#160;</span>There was also <span class='add'>a lot</span> for the rest of the children of Manasseh by their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these <span class='add'>were</span> the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by their families.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS17_3">3&#160;</span>¶ But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these <span class='add'>are</span> the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_4">4&#160;</span> And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore according to the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_5">5&#160;</span> And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which <span class='add'>were</span> on the other side Jordan;
<span class="verse" id="JS17_6">6&#160;</span> Because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manasseh’s sons had the land of Gilead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS17_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that <span class='add'>lieth</span> before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of En-tappuah.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Now</span> Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh <span class='add'>belonged</span> to the children of Ephraim;
<span class="verse" id="JS17_9">9&#160;</span> And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Ephraim <span class='add'>are</span> among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh also <span class='add'>was</span> on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:
<span class="verse" id="JS17_10">10&#160;</span> Southward <span class='add'>it was</span> Ephraim’s, and northward <span class='add'>it was</span> Manasseh’s, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_11">11&#160;</span> And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Beth-shean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns, <span class='add'>even</span> three countries.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_12">12&#160;</span> Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out <span class='add'>the inhabitants of</span> those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_13">13&#160;</span> Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute; but did not utterly drive them out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS17_14">14&#160;</span> And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me <span class='add'>but</span> one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I <span class='add'>am</span> a great people, forasmuch as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed me hitherto?
<span class="verse" id="JS17_15">15&#160;</span> And Joshua answered them, If thou <span class='add'>be</span> a great people, <span class='add'>then</span> get thee up to the wood <span class='add'>country</span>, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_16">16&#160;</span> And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, <span class='add'>both they</span> who <span class='add'>are</span> of Beth-shean and her towns, and <span class='add'>they</span> who <span class='add'>are</span> of the valley of Jezreel.
<span class="verse" id="JS17_17">17&#160;</span> And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, <span class='add'>even</span> to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> a great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one lot <span class='add'>only:</span>
<span class="verse" id="JS17_18">18&#160;</span> But the mountain shall be thine; for it <span class='add'>is</span> a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots, <span class='add'>and</span> though they <span class='add'>be</span> strong.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS18_1">1&#160;</span> And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS18_2">2&#160;</span> And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_3">3&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long <span class='add'>are</span> ye slack to go to possess the land, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers hath given you?
<span class="verse" id="JS18_4">4&#160;</span> Give out from among you three men for <span class='add'>each</span> tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they shall come <span class='add'>again</span> to me.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_5">5&#160;</span> And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_6">6&#160;</span> Ye shall therefore describe the land <span class='add'>into</span> seven parts, and bring <span class='add'>the description</span> hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_7">7&#160;</span> But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS18_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Shiloh.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_9">9&#160;</span> And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a book, and came <span class='add'>again</span> to Joshua to the host at Shiloh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS18_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS18_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_12">12&#160;</span> And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_13">13&#160;</span> And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which <span class='add'>is</span> Beth-el, southward; and the border descended to Ataroth-adar, near the hill that <span class='add'>lieth</span> on the south side of the nether Beth-horon.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_14">14&#160;</span> And the border was drawn <span class='add'>thence</span>, and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from the hill that <span class='add'>lieth</span> before Beth-horon southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjath-baal, which <span class='add'>is</span> Kirjath-jearim, a city of the children of Judah: this <span class='add'>was</span> the west quarter.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_15">15&#160;</span> And the south quarter <span class='add'>was</span> from the end of Kirjath-jearim, and the border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:
<span class="verse" id="JS18_16">16&#160;</span> And the border came down to the end of the mountain that <span class='add'>lieth</span> before the valley of the son of Hinnom, <span class='add'>and</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to En-rogel,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_17">17&#160;</span> And was drawn from the north, and went forth to En-shemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which <span class='add'>is</span> over against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_18">18&#160;</span> And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:
<span class="verse" id="JS18_19">19&#160;</span> And the border passed along to the side of Beth-hoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this <span class='add'>was</span> the south coast.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_20">20&#160;</span> And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This <span class='add'>was</span> the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS18_21">21&#160;</span> Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and the valley of Keziz,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_22">22&#160;</span> And Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim, and Beth-el,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_23">23&#160;</span> And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_24">24&#160;</span> And Chephar-haammonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS18_25">25&#160;</span> Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_26">26&#160;</span> And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_27">27&#160;</span> And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,
<span class="verse" id="JS18_28">28&#160;</span> And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which <span class='add'>is</span> Jerusalem, Gibeath, <span class='add'>and</span> Kirjath; fourteen cities with their villages. This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their families.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_1">1&#160;</span> And the second lot came forth to Simeon, <span class='add'>even</span> for the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_2">2&#160;</span> And they had in their inheritance Beer-sheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_3">3&#160;</span> And Hazar-shual, and Balah, and Azem,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_4">4&#160;</span> And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_5">5&#160;</span> And Ziklag, and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_6">6&#160;</span> And Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_7">7&#160;</span> Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their villages:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_8">8&#160;</span> And all the villages that <span class='add'>were</span> round about these cities to Baalath-beer, Ramath of the south. This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_9">9&#160;</span> Out of the portion of the children of Judah <span class='add'>was</span> the inheritance of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_11">11&#160;</span> And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that <span class='add'>is</span> before Jokneam;
<span class="verse" id="JS19_12">12&#160;</span> And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chisloth-tabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_13">13&#160;</span> And from thence passeth on along on the east to Gittah-hepher, to Ittah-kazin, and goeth out to Remmon-methoar to Neah;
<span class="verse" id="JS19_14">14&#160;</span> And the border compasseth it on the north side to Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthah-el:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_15">15&#160;</span> And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Beth-lehem: twelve cities with their villages.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_16">16&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_17">17&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of Issachar according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_18">18&#160;</span> And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_19">19&#160;</span> And Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_20">20&#160;</span> And Rabbith, and Kishion, and Abez,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_21">21&#160;</span> And Remeth, and En-gannim, and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez;
<span class="verse" id="JS19_22">22&#160;</span> And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Beth-shemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen cities with their villages.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_23">23&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar according to their families, the cities and their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_25">25&#160;</span> And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_26">26&#160;</span> And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihor-libnath;
<span class="verse" id="JS19_27">27&#160;</span> And turneth toward the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthah-el toward the north side of Beth-emek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_28">28&#160;</span> And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, <span class='add'>even</span> unto great Zidon;
<span class="verse" id="JS19_29">29&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>then</span> the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_30">30&#160;</span> Ummah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_31">31&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_32">32&#160;</span>¶ The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, <span class='add'>even</span> for the children of Naphtali according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_33">33&#160;</span> And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_34">34&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>then</span> the coast turneth westward to Aznoth-tabor, and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_35">35&#160;</span> And the fenced cities <span class='add'>are</span> Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_36">36&#160;</span> And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_37">37&#160;</span> And Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_38">38&#160;</span> And Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem, and Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_39">39&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali according to their families, the cities and their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_40">40&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>And</span> the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_41">41&#160;</span> And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_42">42&#160;</span> And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_43">43&#160;</span> And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_44">44&#160;</span> And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_45">45&#160;</span> And Jehud, and Bene-berak, and Gath-rimmon,
<span class="verse" id="JS19_46">46&#160;</span> And Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_47">47&#160;</span> And the coast of the children of Dan went out <span class='add'>too little</span> for them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_48">48&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS19_49">49&#160;</span>¶ When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them:
<span class="verse" id="JS19_50">50&#160;</span> According to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they gave him the city which he asked, <span class='add'>even</span> Timnath-serah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein.
<span class="verse" id="JS19_51">51&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS20_1">1&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> also spake unto Joshua, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS20_2">2&#160;</span> Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses:
<span class="verse" id="JS20_3">3&#160;</span> That the slayer that killeth <span class='add'>any</span> person unawares <span class='add'>and</span> unwittingly may flee thither: and they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood.
<span class="verse" id="JS20_4">4&#160;</span> And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
<span class="verse" id="JS20_5">5&#160;</span> And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.
<span class="verse" id="JS20_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, <span class='add'>and</span> until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS20_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjath-arba, which <span class='add'>is</span> Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="JS20_8">8&#160;</span> And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
<span class="verse" id="JS20_9">9&#160;</span> These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever killeth <span class='add'>any</span> person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_1">1&#160;</span> Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel;
<span class="verse" id="JS21_2">2&#160;</span> And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_3">3&#160;</span> And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, these cities and their suburbs.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_4">4&#160;</span> And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, <span class='add'>which were</span> of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_5">5&#160;</span> And the rest of the children of Kohath <span class='add'>had</span> by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_6">6&#160;</span> And the children of Gershon <span class='add'>had</span> by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_7">7&#160;</span> The children of Merari by their families <span class='add'>had</span> out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_8">8&#160;</span> And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded by the hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are <span class='add'>here</span> mentioned by name,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_10">10&#160;</span> Which the children of Aaron, <span class='add'>being</span> of the families of the Kohathites, <span class='add'>who were</span> of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_11">11&#160;</span> And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which <span class='add'>city is</span> Hebron, in the hill <span class='add'>country</span> of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_12">12&#160;</span> But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, <span class='add'>to be</span> a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_14">14&#160;</span> And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_15">15&#160;</span> And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_16">16&#160;</span> And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, <span class='add'>and</span> Beth-shemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_17">17&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_18">18&#160;</span> Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_19">19&#160;</span> All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, <span class='add'>were</span> thirteen cities with their suburbs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_21">21&#160;</span> For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, <span class='add'>to be</span> a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_22">22&#160;</span> And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Beth-horon with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_23">23&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_24">24&#160;</span> Aijalon with her suburbs, Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_25">25&#160;</span> And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with her suburbs; two cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_26">26&#160;</span> All the cities <span class='add'>were</span> ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that remained. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the <span class='add'>other</span> half tribe of Manasseh <span class='add'>they gave</span> Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, <span class='add'>to be</span> a city of refuge for the slayer; and Beesh-terah with her suburbs; two cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_28">28&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_29">29&#160;</span> Jarmuth with her suburbs, En-gannim with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_30">30&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_31">31&#160;</span> Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_32">32&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, <span class='add'>to be</span> a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammoth-dor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_33">33&#160;</span> All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families <span class='add'>were</span> thirteen cities with their suburbs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_35">35&#160;</span> Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_36">36&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_37">37&#160;</span> Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_38">38&#160;</span> And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, <span class='add'>to be</span> a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,
<span class="verse" id="JS21_39">39&#160;</span> Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in all.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_40">40&#160;</span> So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were <span class='add'>by</span> their lot twelve cities.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_41">41&#160;</span> All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the children of Israel <span class='add'>were</span> forty and eight cities with their suburbs.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_42">42&#160;</span> These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus <span class='add'>were</span> all these cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS21_43">43&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_44">44&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave them rest round about, according to all that he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their enemies before them; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered all their enemies into their hand.
<span class="verse" id="JS21_45">45&#160;</span> There failed not ought of any good thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_1">1&#160;</span> Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,
<span class="verse" id="JS22_2">2&#160;</span> And said unto them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded you, and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you:
<span class="verse" id="JS22_3">3&#160;</span> Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_4">4&#160;</span> And now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, <span class='add'>and</span> unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave you on the other side Jordan.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_5">5&#160;</span> But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> charged you, to love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_6">6&#160;</span> So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Now to the <span class='add'>one</span> half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given <span class='add'>possession</span> in Bashan: but unto the <span class='add'>other</span> half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them,
<span class="verse" id="JS22_8">8&#160;</span> And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that <span class='add'>are</span> in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to see to. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_12">12&#160;</span> And when the children of Israel heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_13">13&#160;</span> And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,
<span class="verse" id="JS22_14">14&#160;</span> And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel; and each one <span class='add'>was</span> an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying,
<span class="verse" id="JS22_16">16&#160;</span> Thus saith the whole congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, What trespass <span class='add'>is</span> this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>?
<span class="verse" id="JS22_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Is</span> the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the congregation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>,
<span class="verse" id="JS22_18">18&#160;</span> But that ye must turn away this day from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? and it will be, <span class='add'>seeing</span> ye rebel to day against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_19">19&#160;</span> Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession <span class='add'>be</span> unclean, <span class='add'>then</span> pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, wherein the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel not against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar beside the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_20">20&#160;</span> Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel,
<span class="verse" id="JS22_22">22&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of gods, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if <span class='add'>it be</span> in rebellion, or if in transgression against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, (save us not this day,)
<span class="verse" id="JS22_23">23&#160;</span> That we have built us an altar to turn from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, or if to offer thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> himself require <span class='add'>it;</span>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_24">24&#160;</span>And if we have not <span class='add'>rather</span> done it for fear of <span class='add'>this</span> thing, saying, In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye to do with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel?
<span class="verse" id="JS22_25">25&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye have no part in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: so shall your children make our children cease from fearing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_26">26&#160;</span> Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice:
<span class="verse" id="JS22_27">27&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>that</span> it <span class='add'>may be</span> a witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we might do the service of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should <span class='add'>so</span> say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say <span class='add'>again</span>, Behold the pattern of the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which our fathers made, not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it <span class='add'>is</span> a witness between us and you.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_29">29&#160;</span> God forbid that we should rebel against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and turn this day from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to build an altar for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God that <span class='add'>is</span> before his tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which <span class='add'>were</span> with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_31">31&#160;</span> And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh, This day we perceive that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> among us, because ye have not committed this trespass against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS22_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them word again.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_33">33&#160;</span> And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt.
<span class="verse" id="JS22_34">34&#160;</span> And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the altar <span class='add'>Ed:</span> for it <span class='add'>shall be</span> a witness between us that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> God.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS23_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass a long time after that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed old <span class='add'>and</span> stricken in age.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_2">2&#160;</span> And Joshua called for all Israel, <span class='add'>and</span> for their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said unto them, I am old <span class='add'>and</span> stricken in age:
<span class="verse" id="JS23_3">3&#160;</span> And ye have seen all that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath done unto all these nations because of you; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>is</span> he that hath fought for you.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_5">5&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, he shall expel them from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath promised unto you.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_6">6&#160;</span> Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom <span class='add'>to</span> the right hand or <span class='add'>to</span> the left;
<span class="verse" id="JS23_7">7&#160;</span> That ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear <span class='add'>by them</span>, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves unto them:
<span class="verse" id="JS23_8">8&#160;</span> But cleave unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, as ye have done unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_9">9&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath driven out from before you great nations and strong: but <span class='add'>as for</span> you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto this day.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span>
<span class="verse" id="JS23_10">10&#160;</span> One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, he <span class='add'>it is</span> that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS23_11">11&#160;</span> Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_12">12&#160;</span> Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, <span class='add'>even</span> these that remain among you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you:
<span class="verse" id="JS23_13">13&#160;</span> Know for a certainty that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God will no more drive out <span class='add'>any of</span> these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath given you.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_14">14&#160;</span> And, behold, this day I <span class='add'>am</span> going the way of all the earth: and ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, <span class='add'>and</span> not one thing hath failed thereof.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> as all good things are come upon you, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God promised you; so shall the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off this good land which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God hath given you.
<span class="verse" id="JS23_16">16&#160;</span> When ye have transgressed the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he hath given unto you.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JS24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS24_1">1&#160;</span> And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_2">2&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, <span class='add'>even</span> Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they served other gods.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_3">3&#160;</span> And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_4">4&#160;</span> And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_5">5&#160;</span> I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_6">6&#160;</span> And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen unto the Red sea.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_7">7&#160;</span> And when they cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the wilderness a long season.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_8">8&#160;</span> And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from before you.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_9">9&#160;</span> Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred against Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you:
<span class="verse" id="JS24_10">10&#160;</span> But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed you still: so I delivered you out of his hand.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_11">11&#160;</span> And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_12">12&#160;</span> And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from before you, <span class='add'>even</span> the two kings of the Amorites; <span class='add'>but</span> not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_13">13&#160;</span> And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS24_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Now therefore fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS24_15">15&#160;</span> And if it seem evil unto you to serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, choose you this day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that <span class='add'>were</span> on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_16">16&#160;</span> And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to serve other gods;
<span class="verse" id="JS24_17">17&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, he <span class='add'>it is</span> that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all the people through whom we passed:
<span class="verse" id="JS24_18">18&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> drave out from before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land: <span class='add'>therefore</span> will we also serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for he <span class='add'>is</span> our God.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_19">19&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for he <span class='add'>is</span> an holy God; he <span class='add'>is</span> a jealous God; he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_20">20&#160;</span> If ye forsake the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and serve strange gods, then he will turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_21">21&#160;</span> And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_22">22&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto the people, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen you the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to serve him. And they said, <span class='add'>We are</span> witnesses.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_23">23&#160;</span> Now therefore put away, <span class='add'>said he</span>, the strange gods which <span class='add'>are</span> among you, and incline your heart unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_24">24&#160;</span> And the people said unto Joshua, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_25">25&#160;</span> So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS24_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that <span class='add'>was</span> by the sanctuary of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_27">27&#160;</span> And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye deny your God.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_28">28&#160;</span> So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS24_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, died, <span class='add'>being</span> an hundred and ten years old.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_30">30&#160;</span> And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-serah, which <span class='add'>is</span> in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill of Gaash.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_31">31&#160;</span> And Israel served the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the works of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he had done for Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JS24_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph.
<span class="verse" id="JS24_33">33&#160;</span> And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill <span class='add'>that pertained to</span> Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
