<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Leviticus 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Leviticus</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_0'>27</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='LV0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Third Book of Moses, called Leviticus  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="LV1_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man of you bring an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, <span class='add'>even</span> of the herd, and of the flock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV1_3">3&#160;</span> If his offering <span class='add'>be</span> a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_4">4&#160;</span> And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt offering; and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_5">5&#160;</span> And he shall kill the bullock before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that <span class='add'>is by</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into his pieces. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_7">7&#160;</span> And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the fire: 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_8">8&#160;</span> And the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that <span class='add'>is</span> on the fire which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the altar: 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_9">9&#160;</span> But his inwards and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall burn all on the altar, <span class='add'>to be</span> a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And if his offering <span class='add'>be</span> of the flocks, <span class='add'>namely</span>, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shall bring it a male without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_11">11&#160;</span> And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the priests, Aaron’s sons, shall sprinkle his blood round about upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_12">12&#160;</span> And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that <span class='add'>is</span> on the fire which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the altar: 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_13">13&#160;</span> But he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the priest shall bring <span class='add'>it</span> all, and burn <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar: it <span class='add'>is</span> a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV1_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> of fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_15">15&#160;</span> And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off his head, and burn <span class='add'>it</span> on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be wrung out at the side of the altar:
<span class="verse" id="LV1_16">16&#160;</span> And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the ashes:
<span class="verse" id="LV1_17">17&#160;</span> And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, <span class='add'>but</span> shall not divide <span class='add'>it</span> asunder: and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the fire: it <span class='add'>is</span> a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_1">1&#160;</span> And when any will offer a meat offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, his offering shall be <span class='add'>of</span> fine flour; and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon: 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_2">2&#160;</span> And he shall bring it to Aaron’s sons the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; and the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, <span class='add'>to be</span> an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_3">3&#160;</span> And the remnant of the meat offering <span class='add'>shall be</span> Aaron’s and his sons’: <span class='add'>it is</span> a thing most holy of the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven, <span class='add'>it shall be</span> unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And if thy oblation <span class='add'>be</span> a meat offering <span class='add'>baken</span> in a pan, it shall be <span class='add'>of</span> fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.
<span class="verse" id="LV2_6">6&#160;</span> Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it <span class='add'>is</span> a meat offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And if thy oblation <span class='add'>be</span> a meat offering <span class='add'>baken</span> in the fryingpan, it shall be made <span class='add'>of</span> fine flour with oil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_8">8&#160;</span> And thou shalt bring the meat offering that is made of these things unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and when it is presented unto the priest, he shall bring it unto the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_9">9&#160;</span> And the priest shall take from the meat offering a memorial thereof, and shall burn <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar: <span class='add'>it is</span> an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_10">10&#160;</span> And that which is left of the meat offering <span class='add'>shall be</span> Aaron’s and his sons’: <span class='add'>it is</span> a thing most holy of the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_11">11&#160;</span> No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, shall be made with leaven: for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but they shall not be burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.
<span class="verse" id="LV2_13">13&#160;</span> And every oblation of thy meat offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering: with all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_14">14&#160;</span> And if thou offer a meat offering of thy firstfruits unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou shalt offer for the meat offering of thy firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire, <span class='add'>even</span> corn beaten out of full ears. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it <span class='add'>is</span> a meat offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_16">16&#160;</span> And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, <span class='add'>part</span> of the beaten corn thereof, and <span class='add'>part</span> of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof: <span class='add'>it is</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_1">1&#160;</span> And if his oblation <span class='add'>be</span> a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer <span class='add'>it</span> of the herd; whether <span class='add'>it be</span> a male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_2">2&#160;</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron’s sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_3">3&#160;</span> And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the inwards,
<span class="verse" id="LV3_4">4&#160;</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> on them, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away.
<span class="verse" id="LV3_5">5&#160;</span> And Aaron’s sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the wood that <span class='add'>is</span> on the fire: <span class='add'>it is</span> an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And if his offering for a sacrifice of peace offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> of the flock; male or female, he shall offer it without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_7">7&#160;</span> If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_8">8&#160;</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_9">9&#160;</span> And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; the fat thereof, <span class='add'>and</span> the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the inwards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_10">10&#160;</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon them, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_11">11&#160;</span> And the priest shall burn it upon the altar: <span class='add'>it is</span> the food of the offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And if his offering <span class='add'>be</span> a goat, then he shall offer it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_13">13&#160;</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood thereof upon the altar round about. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_14">14&#160;</span> And he shall offer thereof his offering, <span class='add'>even</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the inwards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_15">15&#160;</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon them, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_16">16&#160;</span> And the priest shall burn them upon the altar: <span class='add'>it is</span> the food of the offering made by fire for a sweet savour: all the fat <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It shall be</span> a perpetual statute for your generations throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>concerning things</span> which ought not to be done, and shall do against any of them: 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_3">3&#160;</span> If the priest that is anointed do sin according to the sin of the people; then let him bring for his sin, which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_4">4&#160;</span> And he shall bring the bullock unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and shall lay his hand upon the bullock’s head, and kill the bullock before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_5">5&#160;</span> And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullock’s blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation: 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_6">6&#160;</span> And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, before the vail of the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_7">7&#160;</span> And the priest shall put <span class='add'>some</span> of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which <span class='add'>is</span> in the tabernacle of the congregation; and shall pour all the blood of the bullock at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which <span class='add'>is at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_8">8&#160;</span> And he shall take off from it all the fat of the bullock for the sin offering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the inwards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_9">9&#160;</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon them, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_10">10&#160;</span> As it was taken off from the bullock of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall burn them upon the altar of the burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_11">11&#160;</span> And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_12">12&#160;</span> Even the whole bullock shall he carry forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wood with fire: where the ashes are poured out shall he be burnt.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done <span class='add'>somewhat against</span> any of the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>concerning things</span> which should not be done, and are guilty; 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_14">14&#160;</span> When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the congregation shall offer a young bullock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_15">15&#160;</span> And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the bullock shall be killed before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_16">16&#160;</span> And the priest that is anointed shall bring of the bullock’s blood to the tabernacle of the congregation: 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_17">17&#160;</span> And the priest shall dip his finger <span class='add'>in some</span> of the blood, and sprinkle <span class='add'>it</span> seven times before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> before the vail. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_18">18&#160;</span> And he shall put <span class='add'>some</span> of the blood upon the horns of the altar which <span class='add'>is</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that <span class='add'>is</span> in the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall pour out all the blood at the bottom of the altar of the burnt offering, which <span class='add'>is at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_19">19&#160;</span> And he shall take all his fat from him, and burn <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_20">20&#160;</span> And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a sin offering, so shall he do with this: and the priest shall make an atonement for them, and it shall be forgiven them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_21">21&#160;</span> And he shall carry forth the bullock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock: it <span class='add'>is</span> a sin offering for the congregation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_22">22&#160;</span>¶ When a ruler hath sinned, and done <span class='add'>somewhat</span> through ignorance <span class='add'>against</span> any of the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God <span class='add'>concerning things</span> which should not be done, and is guilty; 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_23">23&#160;</span> Or if his sin, wherein he hath sinned, come to his knowledge; he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_24">24&#160;</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_25">25&#160;</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out his blood at the bottom of the altar of burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_26">26&#160;</span> And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings: and the priest shall make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shall be forgiven him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, while he doeth <span class='add'>somewhat against</span> any of the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>concerning things</span> which ought not to be done, and be guilty;
<span class="verse" id="LV4_28">28&#160;</span> Or if his sin, which he hath sinned, come to his knowledge: then he shall bring his offering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath sinned. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_29">29&#160;</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay the sin offering in the place of the burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_30">30&#160;</span> And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_31">31&#160;</span> And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall burn <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar for a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be forgiven him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_32">32&#160;</span> And if he bring a lamb for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_33">33&#160;</span> And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and slay it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_34">34&#160;</span> And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and shall pour out all the blood thereof at the bottom of the altar: 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_35">35&#160;</span> And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace offerings; and the priest shall burn them upon the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and the priest shall make an atonement for his sin that he hath committed, and it shall be forgiven him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_1">1&#160;</span> And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and <span class='add'>is</span> a witness, whether he hath seen or known <span class='add'>of it;</span> if he do not utter <span class='add'>it</span>, then he shall bear his iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_2">2&#160;</span> Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether <span class='add'>it be</span> a carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean cattle, or the carcase of unclean creeping things, and <span class='add'>if</span> it be hidden from him; he also shall be unclean, and guilty. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_3">3&#160;</span> Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatsoever uncleanness <span class='add'>it be</span> that a man shall be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth <span class='add'>of it</span>, then he shall be guilty. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_4">4&#160;</span> Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with <span class='add'>his</span> lips to do evil, or to do good, whatsoever <span class='add'>it be</span> that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth <span class='add'>of it</span>, then he shall be guilty in one of these. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_5">5&#160;</span> And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these <span class='add'>things</span>, that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that <span class='add'>thing:</span> 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for his sin which he hath sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_7">7&#160;</span> And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shall bring for his trespass, which he hath committed, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering.
<span class="verse" id="LV5_8">8&#160;</span> And he shall bring them unto the priest, who shall offer <span class='add'>that</span> which <span class='add'>is</span> for the sin offering first, and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide <span class='add'>it</span> asunder: 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_9">9&#160;</span> And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar: it <span class='add'>is</span> a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_10">10&#160;</span> And he shall offer the second <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering, according to the manner: and the priest shall make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath sinned, and it shall be forgiven him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_11">11&#160;</span>¶ But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put <span class='add'>any</span> frankincense thereon: for it <span class='add'>is</span> a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_12">12&#160;</span> Then shall he bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it, <span class='add'>even</span> a memorial thereof, and burn <span class='add'>it</span> on the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_13">13&#160;</span> And the priest shall make an atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath sinned in one of these, and it shall be forgiven him: and <span class='add'>the remnant</span> shall be the priest’s, as a meat offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_15">15&#160;</span> If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; then he shall bring for his trespass unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering: 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_16">16&#160;</span> And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be forgiven him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are forbidden to be done by the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; though he wist <span class='add'>it</span> not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_18">18&#160;</span> And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance wherein he erred and wist <span class='add'>it</span> not, and it shall be forgiven him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_19">19&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>is</span> a trespass offering: he hath certainly trespassed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_2">2&#160;</span> If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour;
<span class="verse" id="LV6_3">3&#160;</span> Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_4">4&#160;</span> Then it shall be, because he hath sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_5">5&#160;</span> Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add the fifth part more thereto, <span class='add'>and</span> give it unto him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering.
<span class="verse" id="LV6_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass offering, unto the priest: 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_7">7&#160;</span> And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and it shall be forgiven him for any thing of all that he hath done in trespassing therein. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_9">9&#160;</span> Command Aaron and his sons, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the burnt offering: It <span class='add'>is</span> the burnt offering, because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.
<span class="verse" id="LV6_10">10&#160;</span> And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_11">11&#160;</span> And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_12">12&#160;</span> And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it; and he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_13">13&#160;</span> The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar; it shall never go out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And this <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the meat offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, before the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_15">15&#160;</span> And he shall take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat offering, and of the oil thereof, and all the frankincense which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the meat offering, and shall burn <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar <span class='add'>for</span> a sweet savour, <span class='add'>even</span> the memorial of it, unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_16">16&#160;</span> And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_17">17&#160;</span> It shall not be baken with leaven. I have given it <span class='add'>unto them for</span> their portion of my offerings made by fire; it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy, as <span class='add'>is</span> the sin offering, and as the trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_18">18&#160;</span> All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it. <span class='add'>It shall be</span> a statute for ever in your generations concerning the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire: every one that toucheth them shall be holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_20">20&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof at night. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_21">21&#160;</span> In a pan it shall be made with oil; <span class='add'>and when it is</span> baken, thou shalt bring it in: <span class='add'>and</span> the baken pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer <span class='add'>for</span> a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_22">22&#160;</span> And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer it: <span class='add'>it is</span> a statute for ever unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; it shall be wholly burnt. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_23">23&#160;</span> For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_25">25&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the sin offering: In the place where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_26">26&#160;</span> The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_27">27&#160;</span> Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_28">28&#160;</span> But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brasen pot, it shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_29">29&#160;</span> All the males among the priests shall eat thereof: it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_30">30&#160;</span> And no sin offering, whereof <span class='add'>any</span> of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile <span class='add'>withal</span> in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_1">1&#160;</span>Likewise this <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the trespass offering: it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_2">2&#160;</span> In the place where they kill the burnt offering shall they kill the trespass offering: and the blood thereof shall he sprinkle round about upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_3">3&#160;</span> And he shall offer of it all the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_4">4&#160;</span> And the two kidneys, and the fat that <span class='add'>is</span> on them, which <span class='add'>is</span> by the flanks, and the caul <span class='add'>that is</span> above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away: 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_5">5&#160;</span> And the priest shall burn them upon the altar <span class='add'>for</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> a trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_6">6&#160;</span> Every male among the priests shall eat thereof: it shall be eaten in the holy place: it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_7">7&#160;</span> As the sin offering <span class='add'>is</span>, so <span class='add'>is</span> the trespass offering: <span class='add'>there is</span> one law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shall have <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_8">8&#160;</span> And the priest that offereth any man’s burnt offering, <span class='add'>even</span> the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he hath offered. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_9">9&#160;</span> And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, and all that is dressed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shall be the priest’s that offereth it.
<span class="verse" id="LV7_10">10&#160;</span> And every meat offering, mingled with oil, and dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one <span class='add'>as much</span> as another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_11">11&#160;</span>And this <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_12">12&#160;</span> If he offer it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_13">13&#160;</span> Besides the cakes, he shall offer <span class='add'>for</span> his offering leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_14">14&#160;</span> And of it he shall offer one out of the whole oblation <span class='add'>for</span> an heave offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> it shall be the priest’s that sprinkleth the blood of the peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_15">15&#160;</span> And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day that it is offered; he shall not leave any of it until the morning. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_16">16&#160;</span> But if the sacrifice of his offering <span class='add'>be</span> a vow, or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten the same day that he offereth his sacrifice: and on the morrow also the remainder of it shall be eaten: 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_17">17&#160;</span> But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_18">18&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>any</span> of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be eaten at all on the third day, it shall not be accepted, neither shall it be imputed unto him that offereth it: it shall be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shall bear his iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_19">19&#160;</span> And the flesh that toucheth any unclean <span class='add'>thing</span> shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_20">20&#160;</span> But the soul that eateth <span class='add'>of</span> the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that <span class='add'>pertain</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_21">21&#160;</span> Moreover the soul that shall touch any unclean <span class='add'>thing, as</span> the uncleanness of man, or <span class='add'>any</span> unclean beast, or any abominable unclean <span class='add'>thing</span>, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which <span class='add'>pertain</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_23">23&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of goat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_24">24&#160;</span> And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye shall in no wise eat of it.
<span class="verse" id="LV7_25">25&#160;</span> For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even the soul that eateth <span class='add'>it</span> shall be cut off from his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_26">26&#160;</span> Moreover ye shall eat no manner of blood, <span class='add'>whether it be</span> of fowl or of beast, in any of your dwellings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_27">27&#160;</span> Whatsoever soul <span class='add'>it be</span> that eateth any manner of blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_29">29&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall bring his oblation unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of the sacrifice of his peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_30">30&#160;</span> His own hands shall bring the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire, the fat with the breast, it shall he bring, that the breast may be waved <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_31">31&#160;</span> And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast shall be Aaron’s and his sons’. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_32">32&#160;</span> And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest <span class='add'>for</span> an heave offering of the sacrifices of your peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_33">33&#160;</span> He among the sons of Aaron, that offereth the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right shoulder for <span class='add'>his</span> part. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_34">34&#160;</span> For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from off the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_35">35&#160;</span>¶ This <span class='add'>is the portion</span> of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire, in the day <span class='add'>when</span> he presented them to minister unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the priest’s office; 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_36">36&#160;</span> Which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them, <span class='add'>by</span> a statute for ever throughout their generations. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_37">37&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the burnt offering, of the meat offering, and of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace offerings; 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_38">38&#160;</span> Which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to offer their oblations unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, in the wilderness of Sinai.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_2">2&#160;</span> Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a bullock for the sin offering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_3">3&#160;</span> And gather thou all the congregation together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_4">4&#160;</span> And Moses did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded him; and the assembly was gathered together unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_5">5&#160;</span> And Moses said unto the congregation, This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded to be done. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_7">7&#160;</span> And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound <span class='add'>it</span> unto him therewith. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_8">8&#160;</span> And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the breastplate the Urim and the Thummim. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_9">9&#160;</span> And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, <span class='add'>even</span> upon his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_10">10&#160;</span> And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that <span class='add'>was</span> therein, and sanctified them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_11">11&#160;</span> And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all his vessels, both the laver and his foot, to sanctify them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_12">12&#160;</span> And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron’s head, and anointed him, to sanctify him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_13">13&#160;</span> And Moses brought Aaron’s sons, and put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put bonnets upon them; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_14">14&#160;</span> And he brought the bullock for the sin offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_15">15&#160;</span> And he slew <span class='add'>it;</span> and Moses took the blood, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_16">16&#160;</span> And he took all the fat that <span class='add'>was</span> upon the inwards, and the caul <span class='add'>above</span> the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_17">17&#160;</span> But the bullock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And he brought the ram for the burnt offering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_19">19&#160;</span> And he killed <span class='add'>it;</span> and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_20">20&#160;</span> And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_21">21&#160;</span> And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it <span class='add'>was</span> a burnt sacrifice for a sweet savour, <span class='add'>and</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_23">23&#160;</span> And he slew <span class='add'>it;</span> and Moses took of the blood of it, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_24">24&#160;</span> And he brought Aaron’s sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right feet: and Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_25">25&#160;</span> And he took the fat, and the rump, and all the fat that <span class='add'>was</span> upon the inwards, and the caul <span class='add'>above</span> the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder: 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_26">26&#160;</span> And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that <span class='add'>was</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he took one unleavened cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put <span class='add'>them</span> on the fat, and upon the right shoulder: 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_27">27&#160;</span> And he put all upon Aaron’s hands, and upon his sons’ hands, and waved them <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_28">28&#160;</span> And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt <span class='add'>them</span> on the altar upon the burnt offering: they <span class='add'>were</span> consecrations for a sweet savour: it <span class='add'>is</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_29">29&#160;</span> And Moses took the breast, and waved it <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>for</span> of the ram of consecration it was Moses’ part; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_30">30&#160;</span> And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which <span class='add'>was</span> upon the altar, and sprinkled <span class='add'>it</span> upon Aaron, <span class='add'>and</span> upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons’ garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, <span class='add'>and</span> his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the bread that <span class='add'>is</span> in the basket of consecrations, as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_32">32&#160;</span> And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shall ye burn with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_33">33&#160;</span> And ye shall not go out of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation <span class='add'>in</span> seven days, until the days of your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_34">34&#160;</span> As he hath done this day, <span class='add'>so</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded to do, to make an atonement for you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_35">35&#160;</span> Therefore shall ye abide <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that ye die not: for so I am commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_36">36&#160;</span> So Aaron and his sons did all things which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded by the hand of Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass on the eighth day, <span class='add'>that</span> Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_2">2&#160;</span> And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish, and offer <span class='add'>them</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_3">3&#160;</span> And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, <span class='add'>both</span> of the first year, without blemish, for a burnt offering; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_4">4&#160;</span> Also a bullock and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and a meat offering mingled with oil: for to day the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will appear unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And they brought <span class='add'>that</span> which Moses commanded before the tabernacle of the congregation: and all the congregation drew near and stood before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses said, This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded that ye should do: and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall appear unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_7">7&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin offering, and thy burnt offering, and make an atonement for thyself, and for the people: and offer the offering of the people, and make an atonement for them; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin offering, which <span class='add'>was</span> for himself. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_9">9&#160;</span> And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him: and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the bottom of the altar: 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_10">10&#160;</span> But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin offering, he burnt upon the altar; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_11">11&#160;</span> And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_12">12&#160;</span> And he slew the burnt offering; and Aaron’s sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_13">13&#160;</span> And they presented the burnt offering unto him, with the pieces thereof, and the head: and he burnt <span class='add'>them</span> upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_14">14&#160;</span> And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt <span class='add'>them</span> upon the burnt offering on the altar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And he brought the people’s offering, and took the goat, which <span class='add'>was</span> the sin offering for the people, and slew it, and offered it for sin, as the first. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_16">16&#160;</span> And he brought the burnt offering, and offered it according to the manner.
<span class="verse" id="LV9_17">17&#160;</span> And he brought the meat offering, and took an handful thereof, and burnt <span class='add'>it</span> upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.
<span class="verse" id="LV9_18">18&#160;</span> He slew also the bullock and the ram <span class='add'>for</span> a sacrifice of peace offerings, which <span class='add'>was</span> for the people: and Aaron’s sons presented unto him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_19">19&#160;</span> And the fat of the bullock and of the ram, the rump, and that which covereth <span class='add'>the inwards</span>, and the kidneys, and the caul <span class='add'>above</span> the liver: 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_20">20&#160;</span> And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar: 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_21">21&#160;</span> And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; as Moses commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_22">22&#160;</span> And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and blessed them, and came down from offering of the sin offering, and the burnt offering, and peace offerings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_23">23&#160;</span> And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, and came out, and blessed the people: and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared unto all the people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_24">24&#160;</span> And there came a fire out from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and consumed upon the altar the burnt offering and the fat: <span class='add'>which</span> when all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_1">1&#160;</span> And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he commanded them not. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_2">2&#160;</span> And there went out fire from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and devoured them, and they died before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_3">3&#160;</span> Then Moses said unto Aaron, This <span class='add'>is it</span> that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his peace. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_4">4&#160;</span> And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, carry your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_5">5&#160;</span> So they went near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp; as Moses had said. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_6">6&#160;</span> And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die, and lest wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath kindled. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_7">7&#160;</span> And ye shall not go out from the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> upon you. And they did according to the word of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_9">9&#160;</span> Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever throughout your generations: 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_10">10&#160;</span> And that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean; 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_11">11&#160;</span> And that ye may teach the children of Israel all the statutes which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were left, Take the meat offering that remaineth of the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside the altar: for it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy: 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_13">13&#160;</span> And ye shall eat it in the holy place, because it <span class='add'>is</span> thy due, and thy sons’ due, of the sacrifices of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire: for so I am commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_14">14&#160;</span> And the wave breast and heave shoulder shall ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee: for <span class='add'>they be</span> thy due, and thy sons’ due, <span class='add'>which</span> are given out of the sacrifices of peace offerings of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_15">15&#160;</span> The heave shoulder and the wave breast shall they bring with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave <span class='add'>it for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and it shall be thine, and thy sons’ with thee, by a statute for ever; as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron <span class='add'>which were</span> left <span class='add'>alive</span>, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_17">17&#160;</span> Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin offering in the holy place, seeing it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy, and <span class='add'>God</span> hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_18">18&#160;</span> Behold, the blood of it was not brought in within the holy <span class='add'>place:</span> ye should indeed have eaten it in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, as I commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_19">19&#160;</span> And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and such things have befallen me: and <span class='add'>if</span> I had eaten the sin offering to day, should it have been accepted in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_20">20&#160;</span> And when Moses heard <span class='add'>that</span>, he was content.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These <span class='add'>are</span> the beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that <span class='add'>are</span> on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_3">3&#160;</span> Whatsoever parteth the hoof, and is clovenfooted, <span class='add'>and</span> cheweth the cud, among the beasts, that shall ye eat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_4">4&#160;</span> Nevertheless these shall ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the hoof: <span class='add'>as</span> the camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_5">5&#160;</span> And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_6">6&#160;</span> And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hoof; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_7">7&#160;</span> And the swine, though he divide the hoof, and be clovenfooted, yet he cheweth not the cud; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_8">8&#160;</span> Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch; they <span class='add'>are</span> unclean to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_9">9&#160;</span>¶ These shall ye eat of all that <span class='add'>are</span> in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shall ye eat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_10">10&#160;</span> And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which <span class='add'>is</span> in the waters, they <span class='add'>shall be</span> an abomination unto you: 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_11">11&#160;</span> They shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_12">12&#160;</span> Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that <span class='add'>shall be</span> an abomination unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And these <span class='add'>are they which</span> ye shall have in abomination among the fowls; they shall not be eaten, they <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the ospray, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_14">14&#160;</span> And the vulture, and the kite after his kind; 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_15">15&#160;</span> Every raven after his kind; 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_16">16&#160;</span> And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_17">17&#160;</span> And the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_18">18&#160;</span> And the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_19">19&#160;</span> And the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_20">20&#160;</span> All fowls that creep, going upon <span class='add'>all</span> four, <span class='add'>shall be</span> an abomination unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_21">21&#160;</span> Yet these may ye eat of every flying creeping thing that goeth upon <span class='add'>all</span> four, which have legs above their feet, to leap withal upon the earth; 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the beetle after his kind, and the grasshopper after his kind. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_23">23&#160;</span>But all <span class='add'>other</span> flying creeping things, which have four feet, <span class='add'>shall be</span> an abomination unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_24">24&#160;</span> And for these ye shall be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shall be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_25">25&#160;</span> And whosoever beareth <span class='add'>ought</span> of the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>The carcases</span> of every beast which divideth the hoof, and <span class='add'>is</span> not clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, <span class='add'>are</span> unclean unto you: every one that toucheth them shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_27">27&#160;</span> And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts that go on <span class='add'>all</span> four, those <span class='add'>are</span> unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their carcase shall be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_28">28&#160;</span> And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: they <span class='add'>are</span> unclean unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_29">29&#160;</span>¶ These also <span class='add'>shall be</span> unclean unto you among the creeping things that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_30">30&#160;</span> And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_31">31&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_32">32&#160;</span>And upon whatsoever <span class='add'>any</span> of them, when they are dead, doth fall, it shall be unclean; whether <span class='add'>it be</span> any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel <span class='add'>it be</span>, wherein <span class='add'>any</span> work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it shall be cleansed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_33">33&#160;</span> And every earthen vessel, whereinto <span class='add'>any</span> of them falleth, whatsoever <span class='add'>is</span> in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_34">34&#160;</span> Of all meat which may be eaten, <span class='add'>that</span> on which <span class='add'>such</span> water cometh shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every <span class='add'>such</span> vessel shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_35">35&#160;</span>And every <span class='add'>thing</span> whereupon <span class='add'>any part</span> of their carcase falleth shall be unclean; <span class='add'>whether it be</span> oven, or ranges for pots, they shall be broken down: <span class='add'>for</span> they <span class='add'>are</span> unclean, and shall be unclean unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_36">36&#160;</span> Nevertheless a fountain or pit, <span class='add'>wherein there is</span> plenty of water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be unclean.
<span class="verse" id="LV11_37">37&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>any part</span> of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it <span class='add'>shall be</span> clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_38">38&#160;</span>But if <span class='add'>any</span> water be put upon the seed, and <span class='add'>any part</span> of their carcase fall thereon, it <span class='add'>shall be</span> unclean unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_39">39&#160;</span> And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_40">40&#160;</span> And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_41">41&#160;</span> And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth <span class='add'>shall be</span> an abomination; it shall not be eaten. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_42">42&#160;</span> Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon <span class='add'>all</span> four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_43">43&#160;</span> Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby.
<span class="verse" id="LV11_44">44&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God: ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I <span class='add'>am</span> holy: neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_45">45&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I <span class='add'>am</span> holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_46">46&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that creepeth upon the earth: 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_47">47&#160;</span> To make a difference between the unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the beast that may not be eaten.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV12_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_3">3&#160;</span> And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_4">4&#160;</span> And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_5">5&#160;</span> But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of her purifying threescore and six days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV12_6">6&#160;</span> And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:
<span class="verse" id="LV12_7">7&#160;</span> Who shall offer it before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and make an atonement for her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This <span class='add'>is</span> the law for her that hath born a male or a female. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_8">8&#160;</span> And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_2">2&#160;</span> When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot, and it be in the skin of his flesh <span class='add'>like</span> the plague of leprosy; then he shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests:
<span class="verse" id="LV13_3">3&#160;</span> And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of the flesh: and <span class='add'>when</span> the hair in the plague is turned white, and the plague in sight <span class='add'>be</span> deeper than the skin of his flesh, it <span class='add'>is</span> a plague of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_4">4&#160;</span> If the bright spot <span class='add'>be</span> white in the skin of his flesh, and in sight <span class='add'>be</span> not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white; then the priest shall shut up <span class='add'>him that hath</span> the plague seven days: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_5">5&#160;</span> And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague in his sight be at a stay, <span class='add'>and</span> the plague spread not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_6">6&#160;</span> And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague <span class='add'>be</span> somewhat dark, <span class='add'>and</span> the plague spread not in the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean: it <span class='add'>is but</span> a scab: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_7">7&#160;</span> But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of the priest again: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_8">8&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>if</span> the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> a leprosy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_9">9&#160;</span>¶ When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought unto the priest; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_10">10&#160;</span> And the priest shall see <span class='add'>him:</span> and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the rising <span class='add'>be</span> white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and <span class='add'>there be</span> quick raw flesh in the rising;
<span class="verse" id="LV13_11">11&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>is</span> an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean, and shall not shut him up: for he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_12">12&#160;</span> And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover all the skin of <span class='add'>him that hath</span> the plague from his head even to his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_13">13&#160;</span> Then the priest shall consider: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce <span class='add'>him</span> clean <span class='add'>that hath</span> the plague: it is all turned white: he <span class='add'>is</span> clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_14">14&#160;</span> But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_15">15&#160;</span> And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be unclean: <span class='add'>for</span> the raw flesh <span class='add'>is</span> unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> a leprosy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_16">16&#160;</span> Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he shall come unto the priest; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_17">17&#160;</span> And the priest shall see him: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague be turned into white; then the priest shall pronounce <span class='add'>him</span> clean <span class='add'>that hath</span> the plague: he <span class='add'>is</span> clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The flesh also, in which, <span class='add'>even</span> in the skin thereof, was a boil, and is healed, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_19">19&#160;</span> And in the place of the boil there be a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be shewed to the priest; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_20">20&#160;</span> And if, when the priest seeth it, behold, it <span class='add'>be</span> in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> a plague of leprosy broken out of the boil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_21">21&#160;</span> But if the priest look on it, and, behold, <span class='add'>there be</span> no white hairs therein, and <span class='add'>if</span> it <span class='add'>be</span> not lower than the skin, but <span class='add'>be</span> somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_22">22&#160;</span> And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> a plague. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_23">23&#160;</span> But if the bright spot stay in his place, <span class='add'>and</span> spread not, it <span class='add'>is</span> a burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Or if there be <span class='add'>any</span> flesh, in the skin whereof <span class='add'>there is</span> a hot burning, and the quick <span class='add'>flesh</span> that burneth have a white bright spot, somewhat reddish, or white;
<span class="verse" id="LV13_25">25&#160;</span> Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it <span class='add'>be in</span> sight deeper than the skin; it <span class='add'>is</span> a leprosy broken out of the burning: wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> the plague of leprosy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_26">26&#160;</span> But if the priest look on it, and, behold, <span class='add'>there be</span> no white hair in the bright spot, and it <span class='add'>be</span> no lower than the <span class='add'>other</span> skin, but <span class='add'>be</span> somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_27">27&#160;</span> And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: <span class='add'>and</span> if it be spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> the plague of leprosy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_28">28&#160;</span> And if the bright spot stay in his place, <span class='add'>and</span> spread not in the skin, but it <span class='add'>be</span> somewhat dark; it <span class='add'>is</span> a rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean: for it <span class='add'>is</span> an inflammation of the burning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_29">29&#160;</span>¶ If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_30">30&#160;</span> Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it <span class='add'>be</span> in sight deeper than the skin; <span class='add'>and there be</span> in it a yellow thin hair; then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it <span class='add'>is</span> a dry scall, <span class='add'>even</span> a leprosy upon the head or beard. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_31">31&#160;</span> And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold, it <span class='add'>be</span> not in sight deeper than the skin, and <span class='add'>that there is</span> no black hair in it; then the priest shall shut up <span class='add'>him that hath</span> the plague of the scall seven days: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_32">32&#160;</span> And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the plague: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the scall spread not, and there be in it no yellow hair, and the scall <span class='add'>be</span> not in sight deeper than the skin; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_33">33&#160;</span> He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and the priest shall shut up <span class='add'>him that hath</span> the scall seven days more: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_34">34&#160;</span> And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the scall be not spread in the skin, nor <span class='add'>be</span> in sight deeper than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_35">35&#160;</span> But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_36">36&#160;</span> Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_37">37&#160;</span> But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and <span class='add'>that</span> there is black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he <span class='add'>is</span> clean: and the priest shall pronounce him clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_38">38&#160;</span>¶ If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, <span class='add'>even</span> white bright spots; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_39">39&#160;</span> Then the priest shall look: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the bright spots in the skin of their flesh <span class='add'>be</span> darkish white; it <span class='add'>is</span> a freckled spot <span class='add'>that</span> groweth in the skin; he <span class='add'>is</span> clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_40">40&#160;</span> And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he <span class='add'>is</span> bald; <span class='add'>yet is</span> he clean.
<span class="verse" id="LV13_41">41&#160;</span> And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head toward his face, he <span class='add'>is</span> forehead bald: <span class='add'>yet is</span> he clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_42">42&#160;</span> And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white reddish sore; it <span class='add'>is</span> a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald forehead. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_43">43&#160;</span> Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the rising of the sore <span class='add'>be</span> white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_44">44&#160;</span> He is a leprous man, he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean: the priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean; his plague <span class='add'>is</span> in his head. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_45">45&#160;</span> And the leper in whom the plague <span class='add'>is</span>, his clothes shall be rent, and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_46">46&#160;</span> All the days wherein the plague <span class='add'>shall be</span> in him he shall be defiled; he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp <span class='add'>shall</span> his habitation <span class='add'>be</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_47">47&#160;</span>¶ The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, <span class='add'>whether it be</span> a woollen garment, or a linen garment; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_48">48&#160;</span>Whether <span class='add'>it be</span> in the warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any thing made of skin;
<span class="verse" id="LV13_49">49&#160;</span> And if the plague be greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it <span class='add'>is</span> a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto the priest:
<span class="verse" id="LV13_50">50&#160;</span> And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut up <span class='add'>it that hath</span> the plague seven days: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_51">51&#160;</span> And he shall look on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, <span class='add'>or</span> in any work that is made of skin; the plague <span class='add'>is</span> a fretting leprosy; it <span class='add'>is</span> unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_52">52&#160;</span> He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for it <span class='add'>is</span> a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_53">53&#160;</span> And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_54">54&#160;</span> Then the priest shall command that they wash <span class='add'>the thing</span> wherein the plague <span class='add'>is</span>, and he shall shut it up seven days more: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_55">55&#160;</span> And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is washed: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague have not changed his colour, and the plague be not spread; it <span class='add'>is</span> unclean; thou shalt burn it in the fire; it <span class='add'>is</span> fret inward, <span class='add'>whether</span> it <span class='add'>be</span> bare within or without.
<span class="verse" id="LV13_56">56&#160;</span> And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague <span class='add'>be</span> somewhat dark after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof: 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_57">57&#160;</span> And if it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any thing of skin; it <span class='add'>is</span> a spreading <span class='add'>plague:</span> thou shalt burn that wherein the plague <span class='add'>is</span> with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_58">58&#160;</span> And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of skin <span class='add'>it be</span>, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_59">59&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_2">2&#160;</span> This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought unto the priest: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_3">3&#160;</span> And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_4">4&#160;</span> Then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be cleansed two birds alive <span class='add'>and</span> clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop:
<span class="verse" id="LV14_5">5&#160;</span> And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel over running water: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_6">6&#160;</span> As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird <span class='add'>that was</span> killed over the running water: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_7">7&#160;</span> And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose into the open field.
<span class="verse" id="LV14_8">8&#160;</span> And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_9">9&#160;</span> But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_10">10&#160;</span> And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three tenth deals of fine flour <span class='add'>for</span> a meat offering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil.
<span class="verse" id="LV14_11">11&#160;</span> And the priest that maketh <span class='add'>him</span> clean shall present the man that is to be made clean, and those things, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_12">12&#160;</span> And the priest shall take one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of oil, and wave them <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_13">13&#160;</span> And he shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering <span class='add'>is</span> the priest’s, <span class='add'>so is</span> the trespass offering: it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_14">14&#160;</span> And the priest shall take <span class='add'>some</span> of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_15">15&#160;</span> And the priest shall take <span class='add'>some</span> of the log of oil, and pour <span class='add'>it</span> into the palm of his own left hand: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_16">16&#160;</span> And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that <span class='add'>is</span> in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_17">17&#160;</span> And of the rest of the oil that <span class='add'>is</span> in his hand shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_18">18&#160;</span> And the remnant of the oil that <span class='add'>is</span> in the priest’s hand he shall pour upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_19">19&#160;</span> And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and afterward he shall kill the burnt offering: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_20">20&#160;</span> And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_21">21&#160;</span>And if he <span class='add'>be</span> poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take one lamb <span class='add'>for</span> a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat offering, and a log of oil;
<span class="verse" id="LV14_22">22&#160;</span> And two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin offering, and the other a burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_23">23&#160;</span> And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_24">24&#160;</span> And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_25">25&#160;</span> And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering, and the priest shall take <span class='add'>some</span> of the blood of the trespass offering, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_26">26&#160;</span> And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_27">27&#160;</span> And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger <span class='add'>some</span> of the oil that <span class='add'>is</span> in his left hand seven times before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_28">28&#160;</span> And the priest shall put of the oil that <span class='add'>is</span> in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass offering: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_29">29&#160;</span> And the rest of the oil that <span class='add'>is</span> in the priest’s hand he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an atonement for him before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_30">30&#160;</span> And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young pigeons, such as he can get; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Even</span> such as he is able to get, the one <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering, and the other <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering, with the meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_32">32&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law <span class='add'>of him</span> in whom <span class='add'>is</span> the plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get <span class='add'>that which pertaineth</span> to his cleansing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_34">34&#160;</span> When ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_35">35&#160;</span> And he that owneth the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, It seemeth to me <span class='add'>there is</span> as it were a plague in the house: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_36">36&#160;</span> Then the priest shall command that they empty the house, before the priest go <span class='add'>into it</span> to see the plague, that all that <span class='add'>is</span> in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go in to see the house:
<span class="verse" id="LV14_37">37&#160;</span> And he shall look on the plague, and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague <span class='add'>be</span> in the walls of the house with hollow strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight <span class='add'>are</span> lower than the wall; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_38">38&#160;</span> Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_39">39&#160;</span> And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague be spread in the walls of the house; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_40">40&#160;</span> Then the priest shall command that they take away the stones in which the plague <span class='add'>is</span>, and they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_41">41&#160;</span> And he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into an unclean place: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_42">42&#160;</span> And they shall take other stones, and put <span class='add'>them</span> in the place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall plaister the house. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_43">43&#160;</span> And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the house, and after it is plaistered; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_44">44&#160;</span> Then the priest shall come and look, and, behold, <span class='add'>if</span> the plague be spread in the house, it <span class='add'>is</span> a fretting leprosy in the house: it <span class='add'>is</span> unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_45">45&#160;</span> And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry <span class='add'>them</span> forth out of the city into an unclean place. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_46">46&#160;</span> Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_47">47&#160;</span> And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_48">48&#160;</span> And if the priest shall come in, and look <span class='add'>upon it</span>, and, behold, the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is healed.
<span class="verse" id="LV14_49">49&#160;</span> And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_50">50&#160;</span> And he shall kill the one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_51">51&#160;</span> And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_52">52&#160;</span> And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_53">53&#160;</span> But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it shall be clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_54">54&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_55">55&#160;</span> And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_56">56&#160;</span> And for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_57">57&#160;</span> To teach when <span class='add'>it is</span> unclean, and when <span class='add'>it is</span> clean: this <span class='add'>is</span> the law of leprosy.</div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a running issue out of his flesh, <span class='add'>because of</span> his issue he <span class='add'>is</span> unclean.
<span class="verse" id="LV15_3">3&#160;</span> And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it <span class='add'>is</span> his uncleanness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_4">4&#160;</span> Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean.
<span class="verse" id="LV15_5">5&#160;</span> And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_6">6&#160;</span> And he that sitteth on <span class='add'>any</span> thing whereon he sat that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_7">7&#160;</span> And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_8">8&#160;</span> And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_9">9&#160;</span> And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_10">10&#160;</span> And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be unclean until the even: and he that beareth <span class='add'>any of</span> those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_11">11&#160;</span> And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_12">12&#160;</span> And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue, shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_13">13&#160;</span> And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_14">14&#160;</span> And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and come before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest: 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_15">15&#160;</span> And the priest shall offer them, the one <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering, and the other <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for him before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for his issue. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_16">16&#160;</span> And if any man’s seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_17">17&#160;</span> And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_18">18&#160;</span> The woman also with whom man shall lie <span class='add'>with</span> seed of copulation, they shall <span class='add'>both</span> bathe <span class='add'>themselves</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And if a woman have an issue, <span class='add'>and</span> her issue in her flesh be blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even.
<span class="verse" id="LV15_20">20&#160;</span> And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_21">21&#160;</span> And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_22">22&#160;</span> And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_23">23&#160;</span>And if it <span class='add'>be</span> on <span class='add'>her</span> bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth, when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_24">24&#160;</span> And if any man lie with her at all, and her flowers be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days; and all the bed whereon he lieth shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_25">25&#160;</span> And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the time of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her separation; all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her separation: she <span class='add'>shall be</span> unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_26">26&#160;</span> Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her separation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_27">27&#160;</span> And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_28">28&#160;</span> But if she be cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_29">29&#160;</span> And on the eighth day she shall take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_30">30&#160;</span> And the priest shall offer the one <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering, and the other <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for her before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for the issue of her uncleanness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_31">31&#160;</span> Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness; that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile my tabernacle that <span class='add'>is</span> among them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_32">32&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the law of him that hath an issue, and <span class='add'>of him</span> whose seed goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_33">33&#160;</span> And of her that is sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and died; 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_2">2&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy <span class='add'>place</span> within the vail before the mercy seat, which <span class='add'>is</span> upon the ark; that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_3">3&#160;</span> Thus shall Aaron come into the holy <span class='add'>place:</span> with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_4">4&#160;</span> He shall put on the holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these <span class='add'>are</span> holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and <span class='add'>so</span> put them on. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_5">5&#160;</span> And he shall take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_6">6&#160;</span> And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sin offering, which <span class='add'>is</span> for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_7">7&#160;</span> And he shall take the two goats, and present them before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_8">8&#160;</span> And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the other lot for the scapegoat.
<span class="verse" id="LV16_9">9&#160;</span> And Aaron shall bring the goat upon which the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> lot fell, and offer him <span class='add'>for</span> a sin offering.
<span class="verse" id="LV16_10">10&#160;</span> But the goat, on which the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to make an atonement with him, <span class='add'>and</span> to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_11">11&#160;</span> And Aaron shall bring the bullock of the sin offering, which <span class='add'>is</span> for himself, and shall make an atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which <span class='add'>is</span> for himself: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_12">12&#160;</span> And he shall take a censer full of burning coals of fire from off the altar before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring <span class='add'>it</span> within the vail: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_13">13&#160;</span> And he shall put the incense upon the fire before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that <span class='add'>is</span> upon the testimony, that he die not: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_14">14&#160;</span> And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle <span class='add'>it</span> with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then shall he kill the goat of the sin offering, that <span class='add'>is</span> for the people, and bring his blood within the vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_16">16&#160;</span> And he shall make an atonement for the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth among them in the midst of their uncleanness.
<span class="verse" id="LV16_17">17&#160;</span> And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, until he come out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the congregation of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_18">18&#160;</span> And he shall go out unto the altar that <span class='add'>is</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and make an atonement for it; and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put <span class='add'>it</span> upon the horns of the altar round about. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_19">19&#160;</span> And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleanness of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shall bring the live goat: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_21">21&#160;</span> And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send <span class='add'>him</span> away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness:
<span class="verse" id="LV16_22">22&#160;</span> And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go the goat in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="LV16_23">23&#160;</span> And Aaron shall come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, and shall leave them there: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_24">24&#160;</span> And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_25">25&#160;</span> And the fat of the sin offering shall he burn upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_26">26&#160;</span> And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_27">27&#160;</span> And the bullock <span class='add'>for</span> the sin offering, and the goat <span class='add'>for</span> the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy <span class='add'>place</span>, shall <span class='add'>one</span> carry forth without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_28">28&#160;</span> And he that burneth them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_29">29&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>this</span> shall be a statute for ever unto you: <span class='add'>that</span> in the seventh month, on the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and do no work at all, <span class='add'>whether it be</span> one of your own country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you: 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_30">30&#160;</span> For on that day shall <span class='add'>the priest</span> make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, <span class='add'>that</span> ye may be clean from all your sins before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_31">31&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a statute for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_32">32&#160;</span> And the priest, whom he shall anoint, and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the priest’s office in his father’s stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen clothes, <span class='add'>even</span> the holy garments:
<span class="verse" id="LV16_33">33&#160;</span> And he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for the priests, and for all the people of the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_34">34&#160;</span> And this shall be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for all their sins once a year. And he did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them; This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_3">3&#160;</span> What man soever <span class='add'>there be</span> of the house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that killeth <span class='add'>it</span> out of the camp, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_4">4&#160;</span> And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> before the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; blood shall be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his people: 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_5">5&#160;</span> To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them <span class='add'>for</span> peace offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_6">6&#160;</span> And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>at</span> the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_7">7&#160;</span> And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man <span class='add'>there be</span> of the house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_9">9&#160;</span> And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; even that man shall be cut off from among his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And whatsoever man <span class='add'>there be</span> of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_11">11&#160;</span> For the life of the flesh <span class='add'>is</span> in the blood: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it <span class='add'>is</span> the blood <span class='add'>that</span> maketh an atonement for the soul. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_12">12&#160;</span> Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_13">13&#160;</span> And whatsoever man <span class='add'>there be</span> of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.
<span class="verse" id="LV17_14">14&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it is</span> the life of all flesh; the blood of it <span class='add'>is</span> for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh <span class='add'>is</span> the blood thereof: whosoever eateth it shall be cut off. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_15">15&#160;</span> And every soul that eateth that which died <span class='add'>of itself</span>, or that which was torn <span class='add'>with beasts, whether it be</span> one of your own country, or a stranger, he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe <span class='add'>himself</span> in water, and be unclean until the even: then shall he be clean.
<span class="verse" id="LV17_16">16&#160;</span> But if he wash <span class='add'>them</span> not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shall bear his iniquity.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_3">3&#160;</span> After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shall ye not do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan, whither I bring you, shall ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_4">4&#160;</span> Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, to walk therein: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_5">5&#160;</span> Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_6">6&#160;</span>¶ None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover <span class='add'>their</span> nakedness: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LV18_7">7&#160;</span> The nakedness of thy father, or the nakedness of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she <span class='add'>is</span> thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_8">8&#160;</span> The nakedness of thy father’s wife shalt thou not uncover: it <span class='add'>is</span> thy father’s nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_9">9&#160;</span> The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, <span class='add'>whether she be</span> born at home, or born abroad, <span class='add'>even</span> their nakedness thou shalt not uncover. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_10">10&#160;</span> The nakedness of thy son’s daughter, or of thy daughter’s daughter, <span class='add'>even</span> their nakedness thou shalt not uncover: for theirs <span class='add'>is</span> thine own nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_11">11&#160;</span> The nakedness of thy father’s wife’s daughter, begotten of thy father, she <span class='add'>is</span> thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_12">12&#160;</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s sister: she <span class='add'>is</span> thy father’s near kinswoman. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_13">13&#160;</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister: for she <span class='add'>is</span> thy mother’s near kinswoman. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy father’s brother, thou shalt not approach to his wife: she <span class='add'>is</span> thine aunt. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_15">15&#160;</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter in law: she <span class='add'>is</span> thy son’s wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_16">16&#160;</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy brother’s wife: it <span class='add'>is</span> thy brother’s nakedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_17">17&#160;</span> Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness; <span class='add'>for</span> they <span class='add'>are</span> her near kinswomen: it <span class='add'>is</span> wickedness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_18">18&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex <span class='add'>her</span>, to uncover her nakedness, beside the other in her life <span class='add'>time</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_19">19&#160;</span> Also thou shalt not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is put apart for her uncleanness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_20">20&#160;</span> Moreover thou shalt not lie carnally with thy neighbour’s wife, to defile thyself with her. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_21">21&#160;</span> And thou shalt not let any of thy seed pass through <span class='add'>the fire</span> to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LV18_22">22&#160;</span> Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it <span class='add'>is</span> abomination. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_23">23&#160;</span> Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith: neither shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it <span class='add'>is</span> confusion. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_24">24&#160;</span> Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you: 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_25">25&#160;</span> And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_26">26&#160;</span> Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not commit <span class='add'>any</span> of these abominations; <span class='add'>neither</span> any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you: 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_27">27&#160;</span>(For all these abominations have the men of the land done, which <span class='add'>were</span> before you, and the land is defiled;) 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_28">28&#160;</span> That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that <span class='add'>were</span> before you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_29">29&#160;</span> For whosoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the souls that commit <span class='add'>them</span> shall be cut off from among their people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_30">30&#160;</span> Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinance, that <span class='add'>ye</span> commit not <span class='add'>any one</span> of these abominable customs, which were committed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shall be holy: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>am</span> holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall fear every man his mother, and his father, and keep my sabbaths: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And if ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, ye shall offer it at your own will. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_6">6&#160;</span> It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow: and if ought remain until the third day, it shall be burnt in the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_7">7&#160;</span> And if it be eaten at all on the third day, it <span class='add'>is</span> abominable; it shall not be accepted. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore <span class='add'>every one</span> that eateth it shall bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the hallowed thing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and that soul shall be cut off from among his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_10">10&#160;</span> And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather <span class='add'>every</span> grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob <span class='add'>him:</span> the wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: <span class='add'>but</span> in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neighbour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not go up and down <span class='add'>as</span> a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_19">19&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed: neither shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And whosoever lieth carnally with a woman, that <span class='add'>is</span> a bondmaid, betrothed to an husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her; she shall be scourged; they shall not be put to death, because she was not free.
<span class="verse" id="LV19_21">21&#160;</span> And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, <span class='add'>even</span> a ram for a trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_22">22&#160;</span> And the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for his sin which he hath done: and the sin which he hath done shall be forgiven him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: three years shall it be as uncircumcised unto you: it shall not be eaten of. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_24">24&#160;</span> But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy to praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>withal</span>.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_25">25&#160;</span> And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase thereof: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall not eat <span class='add'>any thing</span> with the blood: neither shall ye use enchantment, nor observe times. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_27">27&#160;</span> Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_28">28&#160;</span> Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards, to be defiled by them: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And if a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him.
<span class="verse" id="LV19_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> the stranger that dwelleth with you shall be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_35">35&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_36">36&#160;</span> Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="LV19_37">37&#160;</span> Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_2">2&#160;</span> Again, thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever <span class='add'>he be</span> of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth <span class='add'>any</span> of his seed unto Molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the land shall stone him with stones. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_3">3&#160;</span> And I will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people; because he hath given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_4">4&#160;</span> And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his seed unto Molech, and kill him not: 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_5">5&#160;</span> Then I will set my face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that go a whoring after him, to commit whoredom with Molech, from among their people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_8">8&#160;</span> And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which sanctify you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_9">9&#160;</span>¶ For every one that curseth his father or his mother shall be surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the man that committeth adultery with <span class='add'>another</span> man’s wife, <span class='add'>even he</span> that committeth adultery with his neighbour’s wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_11">11&#160;</span> And the man that lieth with his father’s wife hath uncovered his father’s nakedness: both of them shall surely be put to death; their blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_12">12&#160;</span> And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shall surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_13">13&#160;</span> If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination: they shall surely be put to death; their blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_14">14&#160;</span> And if a man take a wife and her mother, it <span class='add'>is</span> wickedness: they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedness among you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_15">15&#160;</span> And if a man lie with a beast, he shall surely be put to death: and ye shall slay the beast. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_16">16&#160;</span> And if a woman approach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kill the woman, and the beast: they shall surely be put to death; their blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_17">17&#160;</span> And if a man shall take his sister, his father’s daughter, or his mother’s daughter, and see her nakedness, and she see his nakedness; it <span class='add'>is</span> a wicked thing; and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister’s nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_18">18&#160;</span> And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness; he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blood: and both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
<span class="verse" id="LV20_19">19&#160;</span> And thou shalt not uncover the nakedness of thy mother’s sister, nor of thy father’s sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shall bear their iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="LV20_20">20&#160;</span> And if a man shall lie with his uncle’s wife, he hath uncovered his uncle’s nakedness: they shall bear their sin; they shall die childless. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_21">21&#160;</span> And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it <span class='add'>is</span> an unclean thing: he hath uncovered his brother’s nakedness; they shall be childless.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my judgments, and do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dwell therein, spue you not out. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_23">23&#160;</span> And ye shall not walk in the manners of the nation, which I cast out before you: for they committed all these things, and therefore I abhorred them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_24">24&#160;</span> But I have said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to possess it, a land that floweth with milk and honey: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which have separated you from <span class='add'>other</span> people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_25">25&#160;</span> Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean.
<span class="verse" id="LV20_26">26&#160;</span> And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>am</span> holy, and have severed you from <span class='add'>other</span> people, that ye should be mine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_27">27&#160;</span>¶ A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they shall stone them with stones: their blood <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto them, There shall none be defiled for the dead among his people: 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_2">2&#160;</span> But for his kin, that is near unto him, <span class='add'>that is</span>, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_3">3&#160;</span> And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath had no husband; for her may he be defiled. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> he shall not defile himself, <span class='add'>being</span> a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
<span class="verse" id="LV21_5">5&#160;</span> They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_6">6&#160;</span> They shall be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God: for the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire, <span class='add'>and</span> the bread of their God, they do offer: therefore they shall be holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_7">7&#160;</span> They shall not take a wife <span class='add'>that is</span> a whore, or profane; neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband: for he <span class='add'>is</span> holy unto his God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_8">8&#160;</span> Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he offereth the bread of thy God: he shall be holy unto thee: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which sanctify you, <span class='add'>am</span> holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_10">10&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he that is</span> the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes; 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_11">11&#160;</span> Neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother; 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_12">12&#160;</span> Neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God <span class='add'>is</span> upon him: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_13">13&#160;</span> And he shall take a wife in her virginity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_14">14&#160;</span> A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, <span class='add'>or</span> an harlot, these shall he not take: but he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_15">15&#160;</span> Neither shall he profane his seed among his people: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do sanctify him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_17">17&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whosoever <span class='add'>he be</span> of thy seed in their generations that hath <span class='add'>any</span> blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.
<span class="verse" id="LV21_18">18&#160;</span> For whatsoever man <span class='add'>he be</span> that hath a blemish, he shall not approach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_19">19&#160;</span> Or a man that is brokenfooted, or brokenhanded, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_20">20&#160;</span> Or crookbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scabbed, or hath his stones broken;
<span class="verse" id="LV21_21">21&#160;</span> No man that hath a blemish of the seed of Aaron the priest shall come nigh to offer the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire: he hath a blemish; he shall not come nigh to offer the bread of his God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_22">22&#160;</span> He shall eat the bread of his God, <span class='add'>both</span> of the most holy, and of the holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_23">23&#160;</span> Only he shall not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do sanctify them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_24">24&#160;</span> And Moses told <span class='add'>it</span> unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, and that they profane not my holy name <span class='add'>in those things</span> which they hallow unto me: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_3">3&#160;</span> Say unto them, Whosoever <span class='add'>he be</span> of all your seed among your generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel hallow unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from my presence: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_4">4&#160;</span> What man soever of the seed of Aaron <span class='add'>is</span> a leper, or hath a running issue; he shall not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any thing <span class='add'>that is</span> unclean <span class='add'>by</span> the dead, or a man whose seed goeth from him;
<span class="verse" id="LV22_5">5&#160;</span> Or whosoever toucheth any creeping thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatsoever uncleanness he hath; 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_6">6&#160;</span> The soul which hath touched any such shall be unclean until even, and shall not eat of the holy things, unless he wash his flesh with water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_7">7&#160;</span> And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and shall afterward eat of the holy things; because it <span class='add'>is</span> his food. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_8">8&#160;</span> That which dieth of itself, or is torn <span class='add'>with beasts</span>, he shall not eat to defile himself therewith: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_9">9&#160;</span> They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it, and die therefore, if they profane it: I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do sanctify them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_10">10&#160;</span> There shall no stranger eat <span class='add'>of</span> the holy thing: a sojourner of the priest, or an hired servant, shall not eat <span class='add'>of</span> the holy thing. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_11">11&#160;</span> But if the priest buy <span class='add'>any</span> soul with his money, he shall eat of it, and he that is born in his house: they shall eat of his meat.
<span class="verse" id="LV22_12">12&#160;</span> If the priest’s daughter also be <span class='add'>married</span> unto a stranger, she may not eat of an offering of the holy things.
<span class="verse" id="LV22_13">13&#160;</span> But if the priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned unto her father’s house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father’s meat: but there shall no stranger eat thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And if a man eat <span class='add'>of</span> the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth <span class='add'>part</span> thereof unto it, and shall give <span class='add'>it</span> unto the priest with the holy thing. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_15">15&#160;</span> And they shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, which they offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_16">16&#160;</span> Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass, when they eat their holy things: for I the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do sanctify them.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_18">18&#160;</span> Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them, Whatsoever <span class='add'>he be</span> of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that will offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his freewill offerings, which they will offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for a burnt offering; 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Ye shall offer</span> at your own will a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> whatsoever hath a blemish, <span class='add'>that</span> shall ye not offer: for it shall not be acceptable for you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_21">21&#160;</span> And whosoever offereth a sacrifice of peace offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to accomplish <span class='add'>his</span> vow, or a freewill offering in beeves or sheep, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.
<span class="verse" id="LV22_22">22&#160;</span> Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_23">23&#160;</span> Either a bullock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayest thou offer <span class='add'>for</span> a freewill offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.
<span class="verse" id="LV22_24">24&#160;</span> Ye shall not offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye make <span class='add'>any offering thereof</span> in your land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_25">25&#160;</span> Neither from a stranger’s hand shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these; because their corruption <span class='add'>is</span> in them, <span class='add'>and</span> blemishes <span class='add'>be</span> in them: they shall not be accepted for you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_27">27&#160;</span> When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_28">28&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>whether it be</span> cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and her young both in one day.
<span class="verse" id="LV22_29">29&#160;</span> And when ye will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, offer <span class='add'>it</span> at your own will. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_30">30&#160;</span> On the same day it shall be eaten up; ye shall leave none of it until the morrow: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_31">31&#160;</span> Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, and do them: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_32">32&#160;</span> Neither shall ye profane my holy name; but I will be hallowed among the children of Israel: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which hallow you, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_33">33&#160;</span> That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, <span class='add'>Concerning</span> the feasts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which ye shall proclaim <span class='add'>to be</span> holy convocations, <span class='add'>even</span> these <span class='add'>are</span> my feasts. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_3">3&#160;</span> Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day <span class='add'>is</span> the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work <span class='add'>therein:</span> it <span class='add'>is</span> the sabbath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in all your dwellings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_4">4&#160;</span>¶ These <span class='add'>are</span> the feasts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_5">5&#160;</span> In the fourteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month at even <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> passover. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_6">6&#160;</span> And on the fifteenth day of the same month <span class='add'>is</span> the feast of unleavened bread unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: seven days ye must eat unleavened bread. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_7">7&#160;</span> In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_8">8&#160;</span> But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> seven days: in the seventh day <span class='add'>is</span> an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work <span class='add'>therein</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_10">10&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest:
<span class="verse" id="LV23_11">11&#160;</span> And he shall wave the sheaf before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to be accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_12">12&#160;</span> And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb without blemish of the first year for a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_13">13&#160;</span> And the meat offering thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>for</span> a sweet savour: and the drink offering thereof <span class='add'>shall be</span> of wine, the fourth <span class='add'>part</span> of an hin. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_14">14&#160;</span> And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor green ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an offering unto your God: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering; seven sabbaths shall be complete: 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_16">16&#160;</span> Even unto the morrow after the seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new meat offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_17">17&#160;</span> Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals: they shall be of fine flour; they shall be baken with leaven; <span class='add'>they are</span> the firstfruits unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_18">18&#160;</span> And ye shall offer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bullock, and two rams: they shall be <span class='add'>for</span> a burnt offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with their meat offering, and their drink offerings, <span class='add'>even</span> an offering made by fire, of sweet savour unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_19">19&#160;</span> Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin offering, and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_20">20&#160;</span> And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the firstfruits <span class='add'>for</span> a wave offering before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with the two lambs: they shall be holy to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_21">21&#160;</span> And ye shall proclaim on the selfsame day, <span class='add'>that</span> it may be an holy convocation unto you: ye shall do no servile work <span class='add'>therein: it shall be</span> a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them unto the poor, and to the stranger: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_24">24&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the month, shall ye have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_25">25&#160;</span> Ye shall do no servile work <span class='add'>therein:</span> but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_27">27&#160;</span> Also on the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of this seventh month <span class='add'>there shall be</span> a day of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_28">28&#160;</span> And ye shall do no work in that same day: for it <span class='add'>is</span> a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_29">29&#160;</span> For whatsoever soul <span class='add'>it be</span> that shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_30">30&#160;</span> And whatsoever soul <span class='add'>it be</span> that doeth any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_31">31&#160;</span> Ye shall do no manner of work: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_32">32&#160;</span>It <span class='add'>shall be</span> unto you a sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the ninth <span class='add'>day</span> of the month at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_34">34&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month <span class='add'>shall be</span> the feast of tabernacles <span class='add'>for</span> seven days unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_35">35&#160;</span> On the first day <span class='add'>shall be</span> an holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work <span class='add'>therein</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_36">36&#160;</span> Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: on the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: it <span class='add'>is</span> a solemn assembly; <span class='add'>and</span> ye shall do no servile work <span class='add'>therein</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LV23_37">37&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the feasts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which ye shall proclaim <span class='add'>to be</span> holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, a burnt offering, and a meat offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings, every thing upon his day: 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_38">38&#160;</span> Beside the sabbaths of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your freewill offerings, which ye give unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_39">39&#160;</span> Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall keep a feast unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> seven days: on the first day <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sabbath, and on the eighth day <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sabbath. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_40">40&#160;</span> And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God seven days.
<span class="verse" id="LV23_41">41&#160;</span> And ye shall keep it a feast unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> seven days in the year. <span class='add'>It shall be</span> a statute for ever in your generations: ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_42">42&#160;</span> Ye shall dwell in booths seven days; all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths: 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_43">43&#160;</span> That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_44">44&#160;</span> And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_2">2&#160;</span> Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to burn continually.
<span class="verse" id="LV24_3">3&#160;</span> Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the congregation, shall Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continually: <span class='add'>it shall be</span> a statute for ever in your generations. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_4">4&#160;</span> He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth deals shall be in one cake. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_6">6&#160;</span> And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_7">7&#160;</span> And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon <span class='add'>each</span> row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, <span class='add'>even</span> an offering made by fire unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_8">8&#160;</span> Every sabbath he shall set it in order before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continually, <span class='add'>being taken</span> from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_9">9&#160;</span> And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’; and they shall eat it in the holy place: for it <span class='add'>is</span> most holy unto him of the offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made by fire by a perpetual statute. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father <span class='add'>was</span> an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the Israelitish <span class='add'>woman</span> and a man of Israel strove together in the camp; 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_11">11&#160;</span> And the Israelitish woman’s son blasphemed the name <span class='add'>of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span></span>, and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:) 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_12">12&#160;</span> And they put him in ward, that the mind of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> might be shewed them.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_13">13&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_14">14&#160;</span> Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let all that heard <span class='add'>him</span> lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_15">15&#160;</span> And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God shall bear his sin. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_16">16&#160;</span> And he that blasphemeth the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he shall surely be put to death, <span class='add'>and</span> all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name <span class='add'>of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span></span>, shall be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.
<span class="verse" id="LV24_18">18&#160;</span> And he that killeth a beast shall make it good; beast for beast.
<span class="verse" id="LV24_19">19&#160;</span> And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shall it be done to him; 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_20">20&#160;</span> Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him <span class='add'>again</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_21">21&#160;</span> And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it: and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_22">22&#160;</span> Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own country: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones. And the children of Israel did as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_3">3&#160;</span> Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_4">4&#160;</span> But in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land, a sabbath for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_5">5&#160;</span> That which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undressed: <span class='add'>for</span> it is a year of rest unto the land.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_6">6&#160;</span> And the sabbath of the land shall be meat for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thee, 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_7">7&#160;</span> And for thy cattle, and for the beast that <span class='add'>are</span> in thy land, shall all the increase thereof be meat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And thou shalt number seven sabbaths of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_9">9&#160;</span> Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_10">10&#160;</span> And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout <span class='add'>all</span> the land unto all the inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his family. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_11">11&#160;</span> A jubile shall that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather <span class='add'>the grapes</span> in it of thy vine undressed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_12">12&#160;</span>For it <span class='add'>is</span> the jubile; it shall be holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_13">13&#160;</span> In the year of this jubile ye shall return every man unto his possession. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_14">14&#160;</span> And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest <span class='add'>ought</span> of thy neighbour’s hand, ye shall not oppress one another: 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_15">15&#160;</span> According to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, <span class='add'>and</span> according unto the number of years of the fruits he shall sell unto thee: 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_16">16&#160;</span> According to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and according to the fewness of years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for <span class='add'>according</span> to the number <span class='add'>of the years</span> of the fruits doth he sell unto thee. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_17">17&#160;</span> Ye shall not therefore oppress one another; but thou shalt fear thy God: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; and ye shall dwell in the land in safety. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_19">19&#160;</span> And the land shall yield her fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_20">20&#160;</span> And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase: 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_21">21&#160;</span> Then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for three years. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_22">22&#160;</span> And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat <span class='add'>yet</span> of old fruit until the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shall eat <span class='add'>of</span> the old <span class='add'>store</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_23">23&#160;</span>¶ The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land <span class='add'>is</span> mine; for ye <span class='add'>are</span> strangers and sojourners with me.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_24">24&#160;</span> And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_25">25&#160;</span>¶ If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away <span class='add'>some</span> of his possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_26">26&#160;</span> And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it;
<span class="verse" id="LV25_27">27&#160;</span> Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his possession. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_28">28&#160;</span> But if he be not able to restore <span class='add'>it</span> to him, then that which is sold shall remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubile: and in the jubile it shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_29">29&#160;</span> And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold; <span class='add'>within</span> a full year may he redeem it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_30">30&#160;</span> And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that <span class='add'>is</span> in the walled city shall be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations: it shall not go out in the jubile. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_31">31&#160;</span> But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubile.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_32">32&#160;</span> Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, <span class='add'>and</span> the houses of the cities of their possession, may the Levites redeem at any time. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_33">33&#160;</span> And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in <span class='add'>the year of</span> jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites <span class='add'>are</span> their possession among the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_34">34&#160;</span> But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it <span class='add'>is</span> their perpetual possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee; then thou shalt relieve him: <span class='add'>yea, though he be</span> a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thee.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_36">36&#160;</span> Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_37">37&#160;</span> Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_38">38&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, <span class='add'>and</span> to be your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And if thy brother <span class='add'>that dwelleth</span> by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant:
<span class="verse" id="LV25_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> as an hired servant, <span class='add'>and</span> as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, <span class='add'>and</span> shall serve thee unto the year of jubile: 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_41">41&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>then</span> shall he depart from thee, <span class='add'>both</span> he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_42">42&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>are</span> my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shall not be sold as bondmen.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_43">43&#160;</span> Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_44">44&#160;</span> Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, <span class='add'>shall be</span> of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_45">45&#160;</span> Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that <span class='add'>are</span> with you, which they begat in your land: and they shall be your possession. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_46">46&#160;</span> And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit <span class='add'>them for</span> a possession; they shall be your bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigour.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_47">47&#160;</span>¶ And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thee, and thy brother <span class='add'>that dwelleth</span> by him wax poor, and sell himself unto the stranger <span class='add'>or</span> sojourner by thee, or to the stock of the stranger’s family:
<span class="verse" id="LV25_48">48&#160;</span> After that he is sold he may be redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him: 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_49">49&#160;</span> Either his uncle, or his uncle’s son, may redeem him, or <span class='add'>any</span> that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redeem him; or if he be able, he may redeem himself. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_50">50&#160;</span> And he shall reckon with him that bought him from the year that he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of years, according to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_51">51&#160;</span>If <span class='add'>there be</span> yet many years <span class='add'>behind</span>, according unto them he shall give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_52">52&#160;</span> And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then he shall count with him, <span class='add'>and</span> according unto his years shall he give him again the price of his redemption. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_53">53&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> as a yearly hired servant shall he be with him: <span class='add'>and the other</span> shall not rule with rigour over him in thy sight. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_54">54&#160;</span> And if he be not redeemed in these <span class='add'>years</span>, then he shall go out in the year of jubile, <span class='add'>both</span> he, and his children with him.
<span class="verse" id="LV25_55">55&#160;</span> For unto me the children of Israel <span class='add'>are</span> servants; they <span class='add'>are</span> my servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_1">1&#160;</span> Ye shall make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shall ye set up <span class='add'>any</span> image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_2">2&#160;</span>¶ Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_3">3&#160;</span>¶ If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_4">4&#160;</span> Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_5">5&#160;</span> And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_6">6&#160;</span> And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make <span class='add'>you</span> afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land.
<span class="verse" id="LV26_7">7&#160;</span> And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_8">8&#160;</span> And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_9">9&#160;</span> For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_10">10&#160;</span> And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the new. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_11">11&#160;</span> And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_12">12&#160;</span> And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_13">13&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_14">14&#160;</span>¶ But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these commandments; 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_15">15&#160;</span> And if ye shall despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye will not do all my commandments, <span class='add'>but</span> that ye break my covenant: 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_16">16&#160;</span> I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you terror, consumption, and the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart: and ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
<span class="verse" id="LV26_17">17&#160;</span> And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shall reign over you; and ye shall flee when none pursueth you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_18">18&#160;</span> And if ye will not yet for all this hearken unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_19">19&#160;</span> And I will break the pride of your power; and I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass: 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_20">20&#160;</span> And your strength shall be spent in vain: for your land shall not yield her increase, neither shall the trees of the land yield their fruits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me; I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.
<span class="verse" id="LV26_22">22&#160;</span> I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your <span class='add'>high</span> ways shall be desolate. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_23">23&#160;</span> And if ye will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me; 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_24">24&#160;</span> Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_25">25&#160;</span> And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of <span class='add'>my</span> covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities, I will send the pestilence among you; and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver <span class='add'>you</span> your bread again by weight: and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_27">27&#160;</span> And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_28">28&#160;</span> Then I will walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_29">29&#160;</span> And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye eat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_30">30&#160;</span> And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_31">31&#160;</span> And I will make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savour of your sweet odours. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_32">32&#160;</span> And I will bring the land into desolation: and your enemies which dwell therein shall be astonished at it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_33">33&#160;</span> And I will scatter you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: and your land shall be desolate, and your cities waste. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_34">34&#160;</span> Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye <span class='add'>be</span> in your enemies’ land; <span class='add'>even</span> then shall the land rest, and enjoy her sabbaths. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_35">35&#160;</span> As long as it lieth desolate it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_36">36&#160;</span> And upon them that are left <span class='add'>alive</span> of you I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee, as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none pursueth.
<span class="verse" id="LV26_37">37&#160;</span> And they shall fall one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_38">38&#160;</span> And ye shall perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_39">39&#160;</span> And they that are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shall they pine away with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_40">40&#160;</span> If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they trespassed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me; 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_41">41&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity: 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_42">42&#160;</span> Then will I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_43">43&#160;</span> The land also shall be left of them, and shall enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they despised my judgments, and because their soul abhorred my statutes. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_44">44&#160;</span> And yet for all that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: for I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_45">45&#160;</span> But I will for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_46">46&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the statutes and judgments and laws, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made between him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LV27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_1">1&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_2">2&#160;</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons <span class='add'>shall be</span> for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by thy estimation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_3">3&#160;</span> And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_4">4&#160;</span>And if it <span class='add'>be</span> a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_5">5&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_6">6&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> from a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation <span class='add'>shall be</span> three shekels of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_7">7&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> from sixty years old and above; if <span class='add'>it be</span> a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_8">8&#160;</span> But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to his ability that vowed shall the priest value him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_9">9&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> a beast, whereof men bring an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, all that <span class='add'>any man</span> giveth of such unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_10">10&#160;</span> He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_11">11&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, then he shall present the beast before the priest: 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_12">12&#160;</span> And the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, <span class='add'>who art</span> the priest, so shall it be.
<span class="verse" id="LV27_13">13&#160;</span> But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth <span class='add'>part</span> thereof unto thy estimation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And when a man shall sanctify his house <span class='add'>to be</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_15">15&#160;</span> And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth <span class='add'>part</span> of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be his. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_16">16&#160;</span> And if a man shall sanctify unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>some part</span> of a field of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed thereof: an homer of barley seed <span class='add'>shall be valued</span> at fifty shekels of silver.
<span class="verse" id="LV27_17">17&#160;</span> If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, according to thy estimation it shall stand. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_18">18&#160;</span> But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain, even unto the year of the jubile, and it shall be abated from thy estimation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_19">19&#160;</span> And if he that sanctified the field will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth <span class='add'>part</span> of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be assured to him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_20">20&#160;</span> And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_21">21&#160;</span> But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shall be holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as a field devoted; the possession thereof shall be the priest’s. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_22">22&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>a man</span> sanctify unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> a field which he hath bought, which <span class='add'>is</span> not of the fields of his possession; 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_23">23&#160;</span> Then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, <span class='add'>even</span> unto the year of the jubile: and he shall give thine estimation in that day, <span class='add'>as</span> a holy thing unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_24">24&#160;</span> In the year of the jubile the field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, <span class='add'>even</span> to him to whom the possession of the land <span class='add'>did belong</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_25">25&#160;</span> And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> firstling, no man shall sanctify it; whether <span class='add'>it be</span> ox, or sheep: it <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>.
<span class="verse" id="LV27_27">27&#160;</span>And if <span class='add'>it be</span> of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem <span class='add'>it</span> according to thine estimation, and shall add a fifth <span class='add'>part</span> of it thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_28">28&#160;</span> Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of all that he hath, <span class='add'>both</span> of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed: every devoted thing <span class='add'>is</span> most holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_29">29&#160;</span> None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; <span class='add'>but</span> shall surely be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_30">30&#160;</span> And all the tithe of the land, <span class='add'>whether</span> of the seed of the land, <span class='add'>or</span> of the fruit of the tree, <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>: <span class='add'>it is</span> holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_31">31&#160;</span> And if a man will at all redeem <span class='add'>ought</span> of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth <span class='add'>part</span> thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_32">32&#160;</span> And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, <span class='add'>even</span> of whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_33">33&#160;</span> He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_34">34&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> the commandments, which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
