<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Mark 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Mark</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK16_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='MK0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="MK1_1">1&#160;</span> The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_2">2&#160;</span> As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_3">3&#160;</span> The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_4">4&#160;</span> John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_5">5&#160;</span> And there went out unto him all the land of Judæa, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_6">6&#160;</span> And John was clothed with camel’s hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_7">7&#160;</span> And preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_8">8&#160;</span> I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_9">9&#160;</span> And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_10">10&#160;</span> And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him: 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_11">11&#160;</span> And there came a voice from heaven, <span class='add'>saying</span>, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_12">12&#160;</span> And immediately the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_13">13&#160;</span> And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_14">14&#160;</span> Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_15">15&#160;</span> And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_16">16&#160;</span> Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_17">17&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_18">18&#160;</span> And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_19">19&#160;</span> And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the <span class='add'>son</span> of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_20">20&#160;</span> And straightway he called them: and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_21">21&#160;</span> And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day he entered into the synagogue, and taught. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_22">22&#160;</span> And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_23">23&#160;</span> And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_24">24&#160;</span> Saying, Let <span class='add'>us</span> alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_25">25&#160;</span> And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_26">26&#160;</span> And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_27">27&#160;</span> And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine <span class='add'>is</span> this? for with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_28">28&#160;</span> And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round about Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_29">29&#160;</span> And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_30">30&#160;</span> But Simon’s wife’s mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_31">31&#160;</span> And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_32">32&#160;</span> And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_33">33&#160;</span> And all the city was gathered together at the door. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_34">34&#160;</span> And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they knew him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_35">35&#160;</span> And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_36">36&#160;</span> And Simon and they that were with him followed after him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_37">37&#160;</span> And when they had found him, they said unto him, All <span class='add'>men</span> seek for thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_38">38&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore came I forth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_39">39&#160;</span> And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast out devils. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_40">40&#160;</span> And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_41">41&#160;</span> And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth <span class='add'>his</span> hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_42">42&#160;</span> And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_43">43&#160;</span> And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away; 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_44">44&#160;</span> And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_45">45&#160;</span> But he went out, and began to publish <span class='add'>it</span> much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_1">1&#160;</span> And again he entered into Capernaum after <span class='add'>some</span> days; and it was noised that he was in the house. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_2">2&#160;</span> And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no room to receive <span class='add'>them</span>, no, not so much as about the door: and he preached the word unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_3">3&#160;</span> And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_4">4&#160;</span> And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken <span class='add'>it</span> up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_5">5&#160;</span> When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_6">6&#160;</span> But there were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts, 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_7">7&#160;</span> Why doth this <span class='add'>man</span> thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_8">8&#160;</span> And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_9">9&#160;</span> Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, <span class='add'>Thy</span> sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_10">10&#160;</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,) 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_11">11&#160;</span> I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_12">12&#160;</span> And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_13">13&#160;</span> And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_14">14&#160;</span> And as he passed by, he saw Levi the <span class='add'>son</span> of Alphæus sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_15">15&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were many, and they followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_16">16&#160;</span> And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_17">17&#160;</span> When Jesus heard <span class='add'>it</span>, he saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_18">18&#160;</span> And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_19">19&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_20">20&#160;</span> But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_21">21&#160;</span> No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_22">22&#160;</span> And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_23">23&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_24">24&#160;</span> And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_25">25&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an hungred, he, and they that were with him? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_26">26&#160;</span> How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him? 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_27">27&#160;</span> And he said unto them, The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_28">28&#160;</span> Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_1">1&#160;</span> And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there which had a withered hand. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_2">2&#160;</span> And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_3">3&#160;</span> And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand forth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_4">4&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their peace. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_5">5&#160;</span> And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched <span class='add'>it</span> out: and his hand was restored whole as the other. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_6">6&#160;</span> And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_7">7&#160;</span> But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judæa, 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_8">8&#160;</span> And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and <span class='add'>from</span> beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_9">9&#160;</span> And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_10">10&#160;</span> For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for to touch him, as many as had plagues. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_11">11&#160;</span> And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_12">12&#160;</span> And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_13">13&#160;</span> And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth <span class='add'>unto him</span> whom he would: and they came unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_14">14&#160;</span> And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_15">15&#160;</span> And to have power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_16">16&#160;</span> And Simon he surnamed Peter; 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_17">17&#160;</span> And James the <span class='add'>son</span> of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder: 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_18">18&#160;</span> And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the <span class='add'>son</span> of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite, 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_19">19&#160;</span> And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into an house. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_20">20&#160;</span> And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_21">21&#160;</span> And when his friends heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, they went out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_23">23&#160;</span> And he called them <span class='add'>unto him</span>, and said unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan? 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_24">24&#160;</span> And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_25">25&#160;</span> And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_26">26&#160;</span> And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_27">27&#160;</span> No man can enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his house. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_28">28&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_29">29&#160;</span> But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation: 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_30">30&#160;</span> Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_31">31&#160;</span>¶ There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without, sent unto him, calling him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_32">32&#160;</span> And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_33">33&#160;</span> And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren? 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_34">34&#160;</span> And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_35">35&#160;</span> For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_1">1&#160;</span> And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_2">2&#160;</span> And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine, 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_3">3&#160;</span> Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow: 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_4">4&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_5">5&#160;</span> And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth: 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_6">6&#160;</span> But when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_7">7&#160;</span> And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_8">8&#160;</span> And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_10">10&#160;</span> And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_11">11&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all <span class='add'>these</span> things are done in parables: 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_12">12&#160;</span> That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and <span class='add'>their</span> sins should be forgiven them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_13">13&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? and how then will ye know all parables? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_14">14&#160;</span> ¶ The sower soweth the word. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_15">15&#160;</span> And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_16">16&#160;</span> And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness; 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_17">17&#160;</span> And have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time: afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word’s sake, immediately they are offended. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_18">18&#160;</span> And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the word, 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_19">19&#160;</span> And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_20">20&#160;</span> And these are they which are sown on good ground; such as hear the word, and receive <span class='add'>it</span>, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some an hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick? 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_22">22&#160;</span> For there is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested; neither was any thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_23">23&#160;</span> If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_24">24&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Take heed what ye hear: with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you: and unto you that hear shall more be given. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_25">25&#160;</span> For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground; 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_27">27&#160;</span> And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_28">28&#160;</span> For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_29">29&#160;</span> But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it? 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth: 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_32">32&#160;</span> But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_33">33&#160;</span> And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to hear <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_34">34&#160;</span> But without a parable spake he not unto them: and when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_35">35&#160;</span> And the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them, Let us pass over unto the other side. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_36">36&#160;</span> And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was in the ship. And there were also with him other little ships. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_37">37&#160;</span> And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now full. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_38">38&#160;</span> And he was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish? 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_39">39&#160;</span> And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_40">40&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith? 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_41">41&#160;</span> And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_1">1&#160;</span> And they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_2">2&#160;</span> And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_3">3&#160;</span> Who had <span class='add'>his</span> dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with chains: 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_4">4&#160;</span> Because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any <span class='add'>man</span> tame him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_5">5&#160;</span> And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_6">6&#160;</span> But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_7">7&#160;</span> And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, <span class='add'>thou</span> Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_8">8&#160;</span> For he said unto him, Come out of the man, <span class='add'>thou</span> unclean spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_9">9&#160;</span> And he asked him, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy name? And he answered, saying, My name <span class='add'>is</span> Legion: for we are many. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_10">10&#160;</span> And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_11">11&#160;</span> Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine feeding. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_12">12&#160;</span> And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_13">13&#160;</span> And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_14">14&#160;</span> And they that fed the swine fled, and told <span class='add'>it</span> in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what it was that was done. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_15">15&#160;</span> And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_16">16&#160;</span> And they that saw <span class='add'>it</span> told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil, and <span class='add'>also</span> concerning the swine. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_17">17&#160;</span> And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_18">18&#160;</span> And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_19">19&#160;</span> Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, but saith unto him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_20">20&#160;</span> And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and all <span class='add'>men</span> did marvel. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_21">21&#160;</span> And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto him: and he was nigh unto the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_22">22&#160;</span> And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_23">23&#160;</span> And besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: <span class='add'>I pray thee</span>, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_24">24&#160;</span> And <span class='add'>Jesus</span> went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_25">25&#160;</span> And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_26">26&#160;</span> And had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_27">27&#160;</span> When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_28">28&#160;</span> For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_29">29&#160;</span> And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_30">30&#160;</span> And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes? 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_31">31&#160;</span> And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me? 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_32">32&#160;</span> And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_33">33&#160;</span> But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_34">34&#160;</span> And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_35">35&#160;</span> While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue’s <span class='add'>house certain</span> which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further? 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_36">36&#160;</span> As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_37">37&#160;</span> And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_38">38&#160;</span> And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_39">39&#160;</span> And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_40">40&#160;</span> And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put them all out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_41">41&#160;</span> And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee, arise. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_42">42&#160;</span> And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was <span class='add'>of the age</span> of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_43">43&#160;</span> And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded that something should be given her to eat.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_1">1&#160;</span> And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his disciples follow him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_2">2&#160;</span> And when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many hearing <span class='add'>him</span> were astonished, saying, From whence hath this <span class='add'>man</span> these things? and what wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands? 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_3">3&#160;</span> Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_4">4&#160;</span> But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_5">5&#160;</span> And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_6">6&#160;</span> And he marvelled because of their unbelief. And he went round about the villages, teaching. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And he called <span class='add'>unto him</span> the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_8">8&#160;</span> And commanded them that they should take nothing for <span class='add'>their</span> journey, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in <span class='add'>their</span> purse: 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_9">9&#160;</span> But <span class='add'>be</span> shod with sandals; and not put on two coats. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_10">10&#160;</span> And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_11">11&#160;</span> And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that city. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_12">12&#160;</span> And they went out, and preached that men should repent. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_13">13&#160;</span> And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_14">14&#160;</span> And king Herod heard <span class='add'>of him</span>; (for his name was spread abroad:) and he said, That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_15">15&#160;</span> Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_16">16&#160;</span> But when Herod heard <span class='add'>thereof</span>, he said, It is John, whom I beheaded: he is risen from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_17">17&#160;</span> For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias’ sake, his brother Philip’s wife: for he had married her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_18">18&#160;</span> For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have killed him; but she could not: 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_20">20&#160;</span> For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_21">21&#160;</span> And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief <span class='add'>estates</span> of Galilee; 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_22">22&#160;</span> And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give <span class='add'>it</span> thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_23">23&#160;</span> And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give <span class='add'>it</span> thee, unto the half of my kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_24">24&#160;</span> And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_25">25&#160;</span> And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_26">26&#160;</span> And the king was exceeding sorry; <span class='add'>yet</span> for his oath’s sake, and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_27">27&#160;</span> And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought: and he went and beheaded him in the prison, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_28">28&#160;</span> And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_29">29&#160;</span> And when his disciples heard <span class='add'>of it</span>, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_30">30&#160;</span> And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_31">31&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_32">32&#160;</span> And they departed into a desert place by ship privately. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_33">33&#160;</span> And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_34">34&#160;</span> And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_35">35&#160;</span> And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time <span class='add'>is</span> far passed: 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_36">36&#160;</span> Send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_37">37&#160;</span> He answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat? 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_38">38&#160;</span> He saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_39">39&#160;</span> And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_40">40&#160;</span> And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_41">41&#160;</span> And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave <span class='add'>them</span> to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them all. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_42">42&#160;</span> And they did all eat, and were filled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_43">43&#160;</span> And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_44">44&#160;</span> And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_45">45&#160;</span> And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_46">46&#160;</span> And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_47">47&#160;</span> And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_48">48&#160;</span> And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_49">49&#160;</span> But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out: 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_50">50&#160;</span> For they all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately he talked with them, and saith unto them, Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_51">51&#160;</span> And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_52">52&#160;</span> For they considered not <span class='add'>the miracle</span> of the loaves: for their heart was hardened. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_53">53&#160;</span> And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_54">54&#160;</span> And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_55">55&#160;</span> And ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_56">56&#160;</span> And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment: and as many as touched him were made whole.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_1">1&#160;</span> Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_2">2&#160;</span> And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_3">3&#160;</span> For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash <span class='add'>their</span> hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_4">4&#160;</span> And <span class='add'>when they come</span> from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, <span class='add'>as</span> the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_5">5&#160;</span> Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_6">6&#160;</span> He answered and said unto them, Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honoureth me with <span class='add'>their</span> lips, but their heart is far from me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_7">7&#160;</span> Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching <span class='add'>for</span> doctrines the commandments of men. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_8">8&#160;</span> For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, <span class='add'>as</span> the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_10">10&#160;</span> For Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother; and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death: 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_11">11&#160;</span> But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, <span class='add'>It is</span> Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; <span class='add'>he shall be free</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_12">12&#160;</span> And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother; 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_13">13&#160;</span> Making the word of God of none effect through your tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And when he had called all the people <span class='add'>unto him</span>, he said unto them, Hearken unto me every one <span class='add'>of you</span>, and understand: 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_15">15&#160;</span> There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_16">16&#160;</span> If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_17">17&#160;</span> And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples asked him concerning the parable. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_18">18&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Are ye so without understanding also? Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, <span class='add'>it</span> cannot defile him; 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_19">19&#160;</span> Because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all meats? 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_20">20&#160;</span> And he said, That which cometh out of the man, that defileth the man. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_21">21&#160;</span> For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_22">22&#160;</span> Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_23">23&#160;</span> All these evil things come from within, and defile the man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know <span class='add'>it</span>: but he could not be hid. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_25">25&#160;</span> For a <span class='add'>certain</span> woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet: 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_26">26&#160;</span> The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_27">27&#160;</span> But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be filled: for it is not meet to take the children’s bread, and to cast <span class='add'>it</span> unto the dogs. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_28">28&#160;</span> And she answered and said unto him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_29">29&#160;</span> And he said unto her, For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_30">30&#160;</span> And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And again, departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_32">32&#160;</span> And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_33">33&#160;</span> And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue; 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_34">34&#160;</span> And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_35">35&#160;</span> And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_36">36&#160;</span> And he charged them that they should tell no man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published <span class='add'>it</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_37">37&#160;</span> And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done all things well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_1">1&#160;</span> In those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples <span class='add'>unto him</span>, and saith unto them, 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_2">2&#160;</span> I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat: 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_3">3&#160;</span> And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the way: for divers of them came from far. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_4">4&#160;</span> And his disciples answered him, From whence can a man satisfy these <span class='add'>men</span> with bread here in the wilderness? 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_5">5&#160;</span> And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_6">6&#160;</span> And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground: and he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set before <span class='add'>them</span>; and they did set <span class='add'>them</span> before the people. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_7">7&#160;</span> And they had a few small fishes: and he blessed, and commanded to set them also before <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_8">8&#160;</span> So they did eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken <span class='add'>meat</span> that was left seven baskets. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_9">9&#160;</span> And they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent them away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_11">11&#160;</span> And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_12">12&#160;</span> And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you, There shall no sign be given unto this generation. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_13">13&#160;</span> And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to the other side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Now <span class='add'>the disciples</span> had forgotten to take bread, neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_15">15&#160;</span> And he charged them, saying, Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and <span class='add'>of</span> the leaven of Herod. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_16">16&#160;</span> And they reasoned among themselves, saying, <span class='add'>It is</span> because we have no bread. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_17">17&#160;</span> And when Jesus knew <span class='add'>it</span>, he saith unto them, Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_18">18&#160;</span> Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember? 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_19">19&#160;</span> When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_20">20&#160;</span> And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_21">21&#160;</span> And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to touch him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_23">23&#160;</span> And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw ought. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_24">24&#160;</span> And he looked up, and said, I see men as trees, walking. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_25">25&#160;</span> After that he put <span class='add'>his</span> hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_26">26&#160;</span> And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell <span class='add'>it</span> to any in the town. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Cæsarea Philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I am? 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_28">28&#160;</span> And they answered, John the Baptist: but some <span class='add'>say</span>, Elias; and others, One of the prophets. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_29">29&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_30">30&#160;</span> And he charged them that they should tell no man of him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_31">31&#160;</span> And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and <span class='add'>of</span> the chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_32">32&#160;</span> And he spake that saying openly. And Peter took him, and began to rebuke him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_33">33&#160;</span> But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_34">34&#160;</span>¶ And when he had called the people <span class='add'>unto him</span> with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_35">35&#160;</span> For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel’s, the same shall save it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_36">36&#160;</span> For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_37">37&#160;</span> Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_38">38&#160;</span> Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_1">1&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And after six days Jesus taketh <span class='add'>with him</span> Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_3">3&#160;</span> And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_4">4&#160;</span> And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were talking with Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_5">5&#160;</span> And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_6">6&#160;</span> For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_7">7&#160;</span> And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_8">8&#160;</span> And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_9">9&#160;</span> And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man were risen from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_10">10&#160;</span> And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must first come? 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_12">12&#160;</span> And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_13">13&#160;</span> But I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And when he came to <span class='add'>his</span> disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and the scribes questioning with them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_15">15&#160;</span> And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to <span class='add'>him</span> saluted him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_16">16&#160;</span> And he asked the scribes, What question ye with them? 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_17">17&#160;</span> And one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought unto thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit; 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_18">18&#160;</span> And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out; and they could not. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_19">19&#160;</span> He answereth him, and saith, O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_20">20&#160;</span> And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_21">21&#160;</span> And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto him? And he said, Of a child. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_22">22&#160;</span> And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_23">23&#160;</span> Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things <span class='add'>are</span> possible to him that believeth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_24">24&#160;</span> And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_25">25&#160;</span> When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, <span class='add'>Thou</span> dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_26">26&#160;</span> And <span class='add'>the spirit</span> cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_27">27&#160;</span> But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_28">28&#160;</span> And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out? 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_29">29&#160;</span> And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_30">30&#160;</span>¶ And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee; and he would not that any man should know <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_31">31&#160;</span> For he taught his disciples, and said unto them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_32">32&#160;</span> But they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_33">33&#160;</span>¶ And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way? 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_34">34&#160;</span> But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who <span class='add'>should be</span> the greatest. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_35">35&#160;</span> And he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto them, If any man desire to be first, <span class='add'>the same</span> shall be last of all, and servant of all. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_36">36&#160;</span> And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them, 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_37">37&#160;</span> Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_38">38&#160;</span>¶ And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him, because he followeth not us. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_39">39&#160;</span> But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_40">40&#160;</span> For he that is not against us is on our part. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_41">41&#160;</span> For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_42">42&#160;</span> And whosoever shall offend one of <span class='add'>these</span> little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_43">43&#160;</span> And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_44">44&#160;</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_45">45&#160;</span> And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_46">46&#160;</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_47">47&#160;</span> And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_48">48&#160;</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_49">49&#160;</span> For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_50">50&#160;</span> Salt <span class='add'>is</span> good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_1">1&#160;</span> And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judæa by the farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and, as he was wont, he taught them again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away <span class='add'>his</span> wife? tempting him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_3">3&#160;</span> And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you? 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_4">4&#160;</span> And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_5">5&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_6">6&#160;</span> But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and female. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_7">7&#160;</span> For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife; 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_8">8&#160;</span> And they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_9">9&#160;</span> What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_10">10&#160;</span> And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same <span class='add'>matter</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_11">11&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_12">12&#160;</span> And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and <span class='add'>his</span> disciples rebuked those that brought <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_14">14&#160;</span> But when Jesus saw <span class='add'>it</span>, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_15">15&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_16">16&#160;</span> And he took them up in his arms, put <span class='add'>his</span> hands upon them, and blessed them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_18">18&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? <span class='add'>there is</span> none good but one, <span class='add'>that is</span>, God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_19">19&#160;</span> Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_20">20&#160;</span> And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_21">21&#160;</span> Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_22">22&#160;</span> And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_24">24&#160;</span> And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_25">25&#160;</span> It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_26">26&#160;</span> And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved? 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_27">27&#160;</span> And Jesus looking upon them saith, With men <span class='add'>it is</span> impossible, but not with God: for with God all things are possible. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_28">28&#160;</span>¶ Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_29">29&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel’s, 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_30">30&#160;</span> But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_31">31&#160;</span> But many <span class='add'>that are</span> first shall be last; and the last first. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_32">32&#160;</span>¶ And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should happen unto him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Saying</span>, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles: 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_34">34&#160;</span> And they shall mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him: and the third day he shall rise again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come unto him, saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall desire. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_36">36&#160;</span> And he said unto them, What would ye that I should do for you? 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_37">37&#160;</span> They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_38">38&#160;</span> But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_39">39&#160;</span> And they said unto him, We can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized: 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_40">40&#160;</span> But to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but <span class='add'>it shall be given to them</span> for whom it is prepared. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_41">41&#160;</span> And when the ten heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they began to be much displeased with James and John. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_42">42&#160;</span> But Jesus called them <span class='add'>to him</span>, and saith unto them, Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_43">43&#160;</span> But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister: 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_44">44&#160;</span> And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_45">45&#160;</span> For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_46">46&#160;</span>¶ And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimæus, the son of Timæus, sat by the highway side begging. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_47">47&#160;</span> And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, <span class='add'>thou</span> Son of David, have mercy on me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_48">48&#160;</span> And many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried the more a great deal, <span class='add'>Thou</span> Son of David, have mercy on me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_49">49&#160;</span> And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort, rise; he calleth thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_50">50&#160;</span> And he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_51">51&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto him, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee? The blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_52">52&#160;</span> And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole. And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_1">1&#160;</span> And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples, 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_2">2&#160;</span> And saith unto them, Go your way into the village over against you: and as soon as ye be entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat; loose him, and bring <span class='add'>him</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_3">3&#160;</span> And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_4">4&#160;</span> And they went their way, and found the colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met; and they loose him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_5">5&#160;</span> And certain of them that stood there said unto them, What do ye, loosing the colt? 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_6">6&#160;</span> And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded: and they let them go. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_7">7&#160;</span> And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on him; and he sat upon him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_8">8&#160;</span> And many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down branches off the trees, and strawed <span class='add'>them</span> in the way. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_9">9&#160;</span> And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna; Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> he that cometh in the name of the Lord: 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_10">10&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the kingdom of our father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_11">11&#160;</span> And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and when he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide was come, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And on the morrow, when they were come from Bethany, he was hungry: 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_13">13&#160;</span> And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if haply he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not <span class='add'>yet</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_14">14&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard <span class='add'>it.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves; 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_16">16&#160;</span> And would not suffer that any man should carry <span class='add'>any</span> vessel through the temple. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_17">17&#160;</span> And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_18">18&#160;</span> And the scribes and chief priests heard <span class='add'>it</span>, and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him, because all the people was astonished at his doctrine. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_19">19&#160;</span> And when even was come, he went out of the city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_21">21&#160;</span> And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, Master, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_22">22&#160;</span> And Jesus answering saith unto them, Have faith in God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_23">23&#160;</span> For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_24">24&#160;</span> Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive <span class='add'>them</span>, and ye shall have <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_25">25&#160;</span> And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_26">26&#160;</span> But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And they come again to Jerusalem: and as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders, 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_28">28&#160;</span> And say unto him, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority to do these things? 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_29">29&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them, I will also ask of you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_30">30&#160;</span> The baptism of John, was <span class='add'>it</span> from heaven, or of men? answer me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_31">31&#160;</span> And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him? 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_32">32&#160;</span> But if we shall say, Of men; they feared the people: for all <span class='add'>men</span> counted John, that he was a prophet indeed. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_33">33&#160;</span> And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus answering saith unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_1">1&#160;</span> And he began to speak unto them by parables. A <span class='add'>certain</span> man planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about <span class='add'>it</span>, and digged <span class='add'>a place for</span> the winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_2">2&#160;</span> And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_3">3&#160;</span> And they caught <span class='add'>him</span>, and beat him, and sent <span class='add'>him</span> away empty. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_4">4&#160;</span> And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast stones, and wounded <span class='add'>him</span> in the head, and sent <span class='add'>him</span> away shamefully handled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_5">5&#160;</span> And again he sent another; and him they killed, and many others; beating some, and killing some. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_6">6&#160;</span> Having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_7">7&#160;</span> But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_8">8&#160;</span> And they took him, and killed <span class='add'>him</span>, and cast <span class='add'>him</span> out of the vineyard. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_9">9&#160;</span> What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_10">10&#160;</span> And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner: 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_11">11&#160;</span> This was the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_12">12&#160;</span> And they sought to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for they knew that he had spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to catch him in <span class='add'>his</span> words. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_14">14&#160;</span> And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar, or not? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_15">15&#160;</span> Shall we give, or shall we not give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring me a penny, that I may see <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_16">16&#160;</span> And they brought <span class='add'>it</span>. And he saith unto them, Whose <span class='add'>is</span> this image and superscription? And they said unto him, Cæsar’s. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_17">17&#160;</span> And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Cæsar the things that are Cæsar’s, and to God the things that are God’s. And they marvelled at him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Then come unto him the Sadducees, which say there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_19">19&#160;</span> Master, Moses wrote unto us, If a man’s brother die, and leave <span class='add'>his</span> wife <span class='add'>behind him</span>, and leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_20">20&#160;</span> Now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and dying left no seed. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_21">21&#160;</span> And the second took her, and died, neither left he any seed: and the third likewise. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_22">22&#160;</span> And the seven had her, and left no seed: last of all the woman died also. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_23">23&#160;</span> In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_24">24&#160;</span> And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of God? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_25">25&#160;</span> For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_26">26&#160;</span> And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I <span class='add'>am</span> the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_27">27&#160;</span> He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living: ye therefore do greatly err. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_28">28&#160;</span>¶ And one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, Which is the first commandment of all? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_29">29&#160;</span> And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments <span class='add'>is</span>, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord: 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_30">30&#160;</span> And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this <span class='add'>is</span> the first commandment. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_31">31&#160;</span> And the second <span class='add'>is</span> like, <span class='add'>namely</span> this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than these. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_32">32&#160;</span> And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said the truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he: 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_33">33&#160;</span> And to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love <span class='add'>his</span> neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_34">34&#160;</span> And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him <span class='add'>any question.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How say the scribes that Christ is the Son of David? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_36">36&#160;</span> For David himself said by the Holy Ghost, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_37">37&#160;</span> David therefore himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he <span class='add'>then</span> his son? And the common people heard him gladly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_38">38&#160;</span>¶ And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and <span class='add'>love</span> salutations in the marketplaces, 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_39">39&#160;</span> And the chief seats in the synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts: 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_40">40&#160;</span> Which devour widows’ houses, and for a pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_41">41&#160;</span>¶ And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_42">42&#160;</span> And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_43">43&#160;</span> And he called <span class='add'>unto him</span> his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than all they which have cast into the treasury: 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_44">44&#160;</span> For all <span class='add'>they</span> did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, <span class='add'>even</span> all her living. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_1">1&#160;</span> And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto him, Master, see what manner of stones and what buildings <span class='add'>are here</span>! 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_2">2&#160;</span> And Jesus answering said unto him, Seest thou these great buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_3">3&#160;</span> And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_4">4&#160;</span> Tell us, when shall these things be? and what <span class='add'> shall be</span> the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled? 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_5">5&#160;</span> And Jesus answering them began to say, Take heed lest any <span class='add'>man</span> deceive you: 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_6">6&#160;</span> For many shall come in my name, saying, I am <span class='add'>Christ</span>; and shall deceive many. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_7">7&#160;</span> And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not troubled: for <span class='add'>such things</span> must needs be; but the end <span class='add'>shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> yet. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_8">8&#160;</span> For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there shall be famines and troubles: these <span class='add'>are</span> the beginnings of sorrows. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_9">9&#160;</span> ¶ But take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_10">10&#160;</span> And the gospel must first be published among all nations. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_11">11&#160;</span> But when they shall lead <span class='add'> you</span>, and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_12">12&#160;</span> Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up against <span class='add'>their</span> parents, and shall cause them to be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_13">13&#160;</span> And ye shall be hated of all <span class='add'>men</span> for my name’s sake: but he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_14">14&#160;</span> ¶ But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judæa flee to the mountains: 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_15">15&#160;</span> And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house, neither enter <span class='add'>therein</span>, to take any thing out of his house: 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_16">16&#160;</span> And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his garment. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_17">17&#160;</span> But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days! 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_18">18&#160;</span> And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_19">19&#160;</span> For <span class='add'>in</span> those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, neither shall be. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_20">20&#160;</span> And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but for the elect’s sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_21">21&#160;</span> And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here <span class='add'>is</span> Christ; or, lo, <span class='add'>he is</span> there; believe <span class='add'>him</span> not: 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_22">22&#160;</span> For false Christs and false prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if <span class='add'>it were</span> possible, even the elect. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_23">23&#160;</span> But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_24">24&#160;</span> ¶ But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_25">25&#160;</span> And the stars of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_26">26&#160;</span> And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_27">27&#160;</span> And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_28">28&#160;</span> Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near: 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_29">29&#160;</span> So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, <span class='add'>even</span> at the doors. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_30">30&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till all these things be done. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_31">31&#160;</span> Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_32">32&#160;</span> ¶ But of that day and <span class='add'>that</span> hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_33">33&#160;</span> Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='add'>For the Son of man is</span> as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to watch. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_35">35&#160;</span> Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning: 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_36">36&#160;</span> Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_37">37&#160;</span> And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_1">1&#160;</span> After two days was <span class='add'>the feast of</span> the passover, and of unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put <span class='add'>him</span> to death. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_2">2&#160;</span> But they said, Not on the feast <span class='add'>day</span>, lest there be an uproar of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured <span class='add'>it</span> on his head. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_4">4&#160;</span> And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_5">5&#160;</span> For it might have been sold for more than three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. And they murmured against her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_6">6&#160;</span> And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_7">7&#160;</span> For ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye have not always. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_8">8&#160;</span> She hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_9">9&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, <span class='add'>this</span> also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests, to betray him unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_11">11&#160;</span> And when they heard <span class='add'>it</span>, they were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the passover? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_13">13&#160;</span> And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_14">14&#160;</span> And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_15">15&#160;</span> And he will shew you a large upper room furnished <span class='add'>and</span> prepared: there make ready for us. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_16">16&#160;</span> And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_17">17&#160;</span> And in the evening he cometh with the twelve. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_18">18&#160;</span> And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, One of you which eateth with me shall betray me. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_19">19&#160;</span> And they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one, <span class='add'>Is</span> it I? and another <span class='add'>said, Is</span> it I? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_20">20&#160;</span> And he answered and said unto them, <span class='add'>It is</span> one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_21">21&#160;</span> The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had never been born. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake <span class='add'>it</span>, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_23">23&#160;</span> And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave <span class='add'>it</span> to them: and they all drank of it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_24">24&#160;</span> And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_25">25&#160;</span> Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_27">27&#160;</span> And Jesus saith unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_28">28&#160;</span> But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_29">29&#160;</span> But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet <span class='add'>will</span> not I. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_30">30&#160;</span> And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day, <span class='add'>even</span> in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_31">31&#160;</span> But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_32">32&#160;</span> And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_33">33&#160;</span> And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy; 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_34">34&#160;</span> And saith unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_35">35&#160;</span> And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_36">36&#160;</span> And he said, Abba, Father, all things <span class='add'>are</span> possible unto thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_37">37&#160;</span> And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_38">38&#160;</span> Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly <span class='add'>is</span> ready, but the flesh <span class='add'>is</span> weak. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_39">39&#160;</span> And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_40">40&#160;</span> And when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_41">41&#160;</span> And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take <span class='add'>your</span> rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_42">42&#160;</span> Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_43">43&#160;</span>¶ And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_44">44&#160;</span> And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead <span class='add'>him</span> away safely. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_45">45&#160;</span> And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and saith, Master, master; and kissed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_46">46&#160;</span>¶ And they laid their hands on him, and took him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_47">47&#160;</span> And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_48">48&#160;</span> And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and <span class='add'>with</span> staves to take me? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_49">49&#160;</span> I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the scriptures must be fulfilled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_50">50&#160;</span> And they all forsook him, and fled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_51">51&#160;</span> And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about <span class='add'>his</span> naked <span class='add'>body</span>; and the young men laid hold on him: 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_52">52&#160;</span> And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_53">53&#160;</span>¶ And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_54">54&#160;</span> And Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_55">55&#160;</span> And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death; and found none. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_56">56&#160;</span> For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not together. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_57">57&#160;</span> And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_58">58&#160;</span> We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_59">59&#160;</span> But neither so did their witness agree together. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_60">60&#160;</span> And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what <span class='add'>is it which</span> these witness against thee? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_61">61&#160;</span> But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_62">62&#160;</span> And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_63">63&#160;</span> Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we any further witnesses? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_64">64&#160;</span> Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_65">65&#160;</span> And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_66">66&#160;</span>¶ And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest: 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_67">67&#160;</span> And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_68">68&#160;</span> But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_69">69&#160;</span> And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood by, This is <span class='add'>one</span> of them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_70">70&#160;</span> And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art <span class='add'>one</span> of them: for thou art a Galilaean, and thy speech agreeth <span class='add'>thereto</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_71">71&#160;</span> But he began to curse and to swear, <span class='add'>saying</span>, I know not this man of whom ye speak. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_72">72&#160;</span> And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept. </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_1">1&#160;</span> And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried <span class='add'>him</span> away, and delivered <span class='add'>him</span> to Pilate. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_2">2&#160;</span> And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said unto him, Thou sayest <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_3">3&#160;</span> And the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_4">4&#160;</span> And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_5">5&#160;</span> But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_6">6&#160;</span> Now at <span class='add'>that</span> feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_7">7&#160;</span> And there was <span class='add'>one</span> named Barabbas, <span class='add'>which lay</span> bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_8">8&#160;</span> And the multitude crying aloud began to desire <span class='add'>him to do</span> as he had ever done unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_9">9&#160;</span> But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews? 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_10">10&#160;</span> For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_11">11&#160;</span> But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release Barabbas unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_12">12&#160;</span> And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then that I shall do <span class='add'>unto him</span> whom ye call the King of the Jews? 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_13">13&#160;</span> And they cried out again, Crucify him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_14">14&#160;</span> Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And <span class='add'>so</span> Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged <span class='add'>him</span>, to be crucified. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_16">16&#160;</span> And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Prætorium; and they call together the whole band. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_17">17&#160;</span> And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his <span class='add'>head</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_18">18&#160;</span> And began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews! 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_19">19&#160;</span> And they smote him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing <span class='add'>their</span> knees worshipped him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_20">20&#160;</span> And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_21">21&#160;</span> And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_22">22&#160;</span> And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skull. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_23">23&#160;</span> And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he received <span class='add'>it</span> not. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_24">24&#160;</span> And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_25">25&#160;</span> And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_26">26&#160;</span> And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_27">27&#160;</span> And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_28">28&#160;</span> And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was numbered with the transgressors. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_29">29&#160;</span> And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest <span class='add'>it</span> in three days, 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_30">30&#160;</span> Save thyself, and come down from the cross. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_31">31&#160;</span> Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_32">32&#160;</span> Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_33">33&#160;</span> And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_34">34&#160;</span> And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_35">35&#160;</span> And some of them that stood by, when they heard <span class='add'>it</span>, said, Behold, he calleth Elias. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_36">36&#160;</span> And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put <span class='add'>it</span> on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_37">37&#160;</span> And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_38">38&#160;</span> And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_39">39&#160;</span>¶ And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_40">40&#160;</span> There were also women looking on afar off: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome; 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_41">41&#160;</span>(Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_42">42&#160;</span>¶ And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath, 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_43">43&#160;</span> Joseph of Arimathaea, an honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_44">44&#160;</span> And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling <span class='add'>unto him</span> the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_45">45&#160;</span> And when he knew <span class='add'>it</span> of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_46">46&#160;</span> And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_47">47&#160;</span> And Mary Magdalene and Mary <span class='add'>the mother</span> of Joses beheld where he was laid.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='MK16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_1">1&#160;</span> And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the <span class='add'>mother</span> of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_2">2&#160;</span> And very early in the morning the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the week, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_3">3&#160;</span> And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulchre? 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_4">4&#160;</span> And when they looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_5">5&#160;</span> And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were affrighted. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_6">6&#160;</span> And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_7">7&#160;</span> But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_8">8&#160;</span> And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any <span class='add'>man</span>; for they were afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Now when <span class='add'>Jesus</span> was risen early the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>And</span> she went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_11">11&#160;</span> And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_12">12&#160;</span>¶ After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_13">13&#160;</span> And they went and told <span class='add'>it</span> unto the residue: neither believed they them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_15">15&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_16">16&#160;</span> He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_17">17&#160;</span> And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_18">18&#160;</span> They shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_19">19&#160;</span>¶ So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_20">20&#160;</span> And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with <span class='add'>them</span>, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
