<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Obadiah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Obadiah</a></li>
</ul>
<div class='main' id='OB0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Obadiah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='OB1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="OB1_1">1&#160;</span> The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord <span class='nd'>GOD</span> concerning Edom; We have heard a rumour from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and an ambassador is sent among the heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle. 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_2">2&#160;</span> Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly despised. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="OB1_3">3&#160;</span>¶ The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation <span class='add'>is</span> high; that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_4">4&#160;</span> Though thou exalt <span class='add'>thyself</span> as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_5">5&#160;</span> If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut off!) would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the grapegatherers came to thee, would they not leave <span class='add'>some</span> grapes?
<span class="verse" id="OB1_6">6&#160;</span>How are <span class='add'>the things</span> of Esau searched out! <span class='add'>how</span> are his hidden things sought up! 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_7">7&#160;</span> All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee <span class='add'>even</span> to the border: the men that were at peace with thee have deceived thee, <span class='add'>and</span> prevailed against thee; <span class='add'>they that eat</span> thy bread have laid a wound under thee: <span class='add'>there is</span> none understanding in him.
<span class="verse" id="OB1_8">8&#160;</span> Shall I not in that day, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, even destroy the wise <span class='add'>men</span> out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau? 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_9">9&#160;</span> And thy mighty <span class='add'>men</span>, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="OB1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ For <span class='add'>thy</span> violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_11">11&#160;</span> In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou <span class='add'>wast</span> as one of them.
<span class="verse" id="OB1_12">12&#160;</span> But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress.
<span class="verse" id="OB1_13">13&#160;</span> Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid <span class='add'>hands</span> on their substance in the day of their calamity;
<span class="verse" id="OB1_14">14&#160;</span> Neither shouldest thou have stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distress.
<span class="verse" id="OB1_15">15&#160;</span> For the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> near upon all the heathen: as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon thine own head. 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_16">16&#160;</span> For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, <span class='add'>so</span> shall all the heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="OB1_17">17&#160;</span>¶ But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.
<span class="verse" id="OB1_18">18&#160;</span> And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them; and there shall not be <span class='add'>any</span> remaining of the house of Esau; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_19">19&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>they of</span> the south shall possess the mount of Esau; and <span class='add'>they of</span> the plain the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and Benjamin <span class='add'>shall possess</span> Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="OB1_20">20&#160;</span> And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel <span class='add'>shall possess</span> that of the Canaanites, <span class='add'>even</span> unto Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the south.
<span class="verse" id="OB1_21">21&#160;</span> And saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
