<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Ruth 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Ruth</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='RUT.xhtml#RT1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='RUT.xhtml#RT2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='RUT.xhtml#RT3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='RUT.xhtml#RT4_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='RT0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Ruth  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RT1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="RT1_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Beth-lehem-judah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.
<span class="verse" id="RT1_2">2&#160;</span> And the name of the man <span class='add'>was</span> Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Beth-lehem-judah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there.
<span class="verse" id="RT1_3">3&#160;</span> And Elimelech Naomi’s husband died; and she was left, and her two sons. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_4">4&#160;</span> And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one <span class='add'>was</span> Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there about ten years. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_5">5&#160;</span> And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left of her two sons and her husband. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had visited his people in giving them bread. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_7">7&#160;</span> Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_8">8&#160;</span> And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her mother’s house: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_9">9&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> grant you that ye may find rest, each <span class='add'>of you</span> in the house of her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice, and wept. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_10">10&#160;</span> And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy people. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_11">11&#160;</span> And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me? <span class='add'>are</span> there yet <span class='add'>any more</span> sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands? 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_12">12&#160;</span> Turn again, my daughters, go <span class='add'>your way;</span> for I am too old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, <span class='add'>if</span> I should have an husband also to night, and should also bear sons;
<span class="verse" id="RT1_13">13&#160;</span> Would ye tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your sakes that the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is gone out against me.
<span class="verse" id="RT1_14">14&#160;</span> And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_15">15&#160;</span> And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_16">16&#160;</span> And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, <span class='add'>or</span> to return from following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people <span class='add'>shall be</span> my people, and thy God my God:
<span class="verse" id="RT1_17">17&#160;</span> Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> do so to me, and more also, <span class='add'>if ought</span> but death part thee and me. 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_18">18&#160;</span> When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then she left speaking unto her.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT1_19">19&#160;</span>¶ So they two went until they came to Beth-lehem. And it came to pass, when they were come to Beth-lehem, that all the city was moved about them, and they said, <span class='add'>Is</span> this Naomi? 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_20">20&#160;</span> And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.
<span class="verse" id="RT1_21">21&#160;</span> I went out full, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath brought me home again empty: why <span class='add'>then</span> call ye me Naomi, seeing the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath afflicted me? 
<span class="verse" id="RT1_22">22&#160;</span> So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of the country of Moab: and they came to Beth-lehem in the beginning of barley harvest.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RT2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT2_1">1&#160;</span> And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband’s, a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech; and his name <span class='add'>was</span> Boaz.
<span class="verse" id="RT2_2">2&#160;</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and glean ears of corn after <span class='add'>him</span> in whose sight I shall find grace. And she said unto her, Go, my daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_3">3&#160;</span> And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field <span class='add'>belonging</span> unto Boaz, who <span class='add'>was</span> of the kindred of Elimelech.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT2_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, Boaz came from Beth-lehem, and said unto the reapers, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>be</span> with you. And they answered him, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> bless thee. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_5">5&#160;</span> Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose damsel <span class='add'>is</span> this? 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_6">6&#160;</span> And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It <span class='add'>is</span> the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab: 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_7">7&#160;</span> And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she tarried a little in the house. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_8">8&#160;</span> Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens: 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Let</span> thine eyes <span class='add'>be</span> on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and drink of <span class='add'>that</span> which the young men have drawn. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_10">10&#160;</span> Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I <span class='add'>am</span> a stranger? 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_11">11&#160;</span> And Boaz answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine husband: and <span class='add'>how</span> thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_12">12&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_13">13&#160;</span> Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens.
<span class="verse" id="RT2_14">14&#160;</span> And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers: and he reached her parched <span class='add'>corn</span>, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_15">15&#160;</span> And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
<span class="verse" id="RT2_16">16&#160;</span> And let fall also <span class='add'>some</span> of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave <span class='add'>them</span>, that she may glean <span class='add'>them</span>, and rebuke her not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT2_17">17&#160;</span> So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT2_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And she took <span class='add'>it</span> up, and went into the city: and her mother in law saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that she had reserved after she was sufficed. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_19">19&#160;</span> And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to day? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and said, The man’s name with whom I wrought to day <span class='add'>is</span> Boaz. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_20">20&#160;</span> And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> he of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man <span class='add'>is</span> near of kin unto us, one of our next kinsmen.
<span class="verse" id="RT2_21">21&#160;</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest. 
<span class="verse" id="RT2_22">22&#160;</span> And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, <span class='add'>It is</span> good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not in any other field.
<span class="verse" id="RT2_23">23&#160;</span> So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RT3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT3_1">1&#160;</span> Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee? 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_2">2&#160;</span>And now <span class='add'>is</span> not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_3">3&#160;</span> Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee down to the floor: <span class='add'>but</span> make not thyself known unto the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_4">4&#160;</span> And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet, and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do.
<span class="verse" id="RT3_5">5&#160;</span> And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT3_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that her mother in law bade her. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_7">7&#160;</span> And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly, and uncovered his feet, and laid her down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.
<span class="verse" id="RT3_9">9&#160;</span> And he said, Who <span class='add'>art</span> thou? And she answered, I <span class='add'>am</span> Ruth thine handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou <span class='add'>art</span> a near kinsman.
<span class="verse" id="RT3_10">10&#160;</span> And he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> thou of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, my daughter: <span class='add'>for</span> thou hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_11">11&#160;</span> And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou <span class='add'>art</span> a virtuous woman.
<span class="verse" id="RT3_12">12&#160;</span> And now it is true that I <span class='add'>am thy</span> near kinsman: howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than I. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_13">13&#160;</span> Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, <span class='add'>that</span> if he will perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman’s part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, <span class='add'>as</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth: lie down until the morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT3_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman came into the floor. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_15">15&#160;</span> Also he said, Bring the vail that <span class='add'>thou hast</span> upon thee, and hold it. And when she held it, he measured six <span class='add'>measures</span> of barley, and laid <span class='add'>it</span> on her: and she went into the city.
<span class="verse" id="RT3_16">16&#160;</span> And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who <span class='add'>art</span> thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_17">17&#160;</span> And she said, These six <span class='add'>measures</span> of barley gave he me; for he said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law. 
<span class="verse" id="RT3_18">18&#160;</span> Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='RT4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT4_1">1&#160;</span> Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and, behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_2">2&#160;</span> And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_3">3&#160;</span> And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which <span class='add'>was</span> our brother Elimelech’s: 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_4">4&#160;</span> And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy <span class='add'>it</span> before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem <span class='add'>it</span>, redeem <span class='add'>it:</span> but if thou wilt not redeem <span class='add'>it, then</span> tell me, that I may know: for <span class='add'>there is</span> none to redeem <span class='add'>it</span> beside thee; and I <span class='add'>am</span> after thee. And he said, I will redeem <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="RT4_5">5&#160;</span> Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy <span class='add'>it</span> also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT4_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem <span class='add'>it</span> for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot redeem <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_7">7&#160;</span>Now this <span class='add'>was the manner</span> in former time in Israel concerning redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man plucked off his shoe, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> to his neighbour: and this <span class='add'>was</span> a testimony in Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_8">8&#160;</span> Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy <span class='add'>it</span> for thee. So he drew off his shoe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT4_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Boaz said unto the elders, and <span class='add'>unto</span> all the people, Ye <span class='add'>are</span> witnesses this day, that I have bought all that <span class='add'>was</span> Elimelech’s, and all that <span class='add'>was</span> Chilion’s and Mahlon’s, of the hand of Naomi. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_10">10&#160;</span> Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye <span class='add'>are</span> witnesses this day. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_11">11&#160;</span> And all the people that <span class='add'>were</span> in the gate, and the elders, said, <span class='add'>We are</span> witnesses. The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Beth-lehem:
<span class="verse" id="RT4_12">12&#160;</span> And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, of the seed which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall give thee of this young woman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT4_13">13&#160;</span>¶ So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto her, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave her conception, and she bare a son. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_14">14&#160;</span> And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which hath not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="RT4_15">15&#160;</span> And he shall be unto thee a restorer of <span class='add'>thy</span> life, and a nourisher of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is better to thee than seven sons, hath born him.
<span class="verse" id="RT4_16">16&#160;</span> And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it. 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_17">17&#160;</span> And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he <span class='add'>is</span> the father of Jesse, the father of David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RT4_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are</span> the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron, 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_19">19&#160;</span> And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab, 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_20">20&#160;</span> And Amminadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon,
<span class="verse" id="RT4_21">21&#160;</span> And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed, 
<span class="verse" id="RT4_22">22&#160;</span> And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
