<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha 2 Chronicles 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Chronicles</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R24_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R25_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R27_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R28_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R210_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R211_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R212_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R213_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R214_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R215_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R217_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R218_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R219_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R221_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R222_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R223_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R224_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R225_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R226_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R227_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R228_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R229_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R230_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R231_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R232_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R234_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R235_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_0'>36</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='R20_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Second Book of the Chronicles  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R21_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="R21_1">1&#160;</span> And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God <span class='add'>was</span> with him, and magnified him exceedingly. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_2">2&#160;</span> Then Solomon spake unto all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in all Israel, the chief of the fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_3">3&#160;</span> So Solomon, and all the congregation with him, went to the high place that <span class='add'>was</span> at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_4">4&#160;</span> But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjath-jearim to <span class='add'>the place which</span> David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_5">5&#160;</span> Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it.
<span class="verse" id="R21_6">6&#160;</span> And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which <span class='add'>was</span> at the tabernacle of the congregation, and offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_7">7&#160;</span>¶ In that night did God appear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask what I shall give thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_8">8&#160;</span> And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_9">9&#160;</span> Now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, let thy promise unto David my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.
<span class="verse" id="R21_10">10&#160;</span> Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, <span class='add'>that is so</span> great? 
<span class="verse" id="R21_11">11&#160;</span> And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king: 
<span class="verse" id="R21_12">12&#160;</span> Wisdom and knowledge <span class='add'>is</span> granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that <span class='add'>have been</span> before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then Solomon came <span class='add'>from his journey</span> to the high place that <span class='add'>was</span> at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation, and reigned over Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_14">14&#160;</span> And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_15">15&#160;</span> And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem <span class='add'>as plenteous</span> as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that <span class='add'>are</span> in the vale for abundance.
<span class="verse" id="R21_16">16&#160;</span> And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king’s merchants received the linen yarn at a price.
<span class="verse" id="R21_17">17&#160;</span> And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so brought they out <span class='add'>horses</span> for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R22_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_1">1&#160;</span> And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and an house for his kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_2">2&#160;</span> And Solomon told out threescore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an house to dwell therein, <span class='add'>even so deal with me</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R22_4">4&#160;</span> Behold, I build an house to the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, to dedicate <span class='add'>it</span> to him, <span class='add'>and</span> to burn before him sweet incense, and for the continual shewbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God. This <span class='add'>is an ordinance</span> for ever to Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R22_5">5&#160;</span> And the house which I build <span class='add'>is</span> great: for great <span class='add'>is</span> our God above all gods. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_6">6&#160;</span> But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who <span class='add'>am</span> I then, that I should build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him?
<span class="verse" id="R22_7">7&#160;</span> Send me now therefore a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can skill to grave with the cunning men that <span class='add'>are</span> with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.
<span class="verse" id="R22_8">8&#160;</span> Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skill to cut timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my servants <span class='add'>shall be</span> with thy servants,
<span class="verse" id="R22_9">9&#160;</span> Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to build <span class='add'>shall be</span> wonderful great.
<span class="verse" id="R22_10">10&#160;</span> And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath loved his people, he hath made thee king over them. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_12">12&#160;</span> Huram said moreover, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and an house for his kingdom.
<span class="verse" id="R22_13">13&#160;</span> And now I have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father’s, 
<span class="verse" id="R22_14">14&#160;</span> The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father <span class='add'>was</span> a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any manner of graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with thy cunning men, and with the cunning men of my lord David thy father. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_15">15&#160;</span> Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants: 
<span class="verse" id="R22_16">16&#160;</span> And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt need: and we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa; and thou shalt carry it up to Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_17">17&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon numbered all the strangers that <span class='add'>were</span> in the land of Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and three thousand and six hundred.
<span class="verse" id="R22_18">18&#160;</span> And he set threescore and ten thousand of them <span class='add'>to be</span> bearers of burdens, and fourscore thousand <span class='add'>to be</span> hewers in the mountain, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people a work.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R23_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_1">1&#160;</span> Then Solomon began to build the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> appeared unto David his father, in the place that David had prepared in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite.
<span class="verse" id="R23_2">2&#160;</span> And he began to build in the second <span class='add'>day</span> of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Now these <span class='add'>are the things wherein</span> Solomon was instructed for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure <span class='add'>was</span> threescore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.
<span class="verse" id="R23_4">4&#160;</span> And the porch that <span class='add'>was</span> in the front <span class='add'>of the house</span>, the length <span class='add'>of it was</span> according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the height <span class='add'>was</span> an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_5">5&#160;</span> And the greater house he cieled with fir tree, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set thereon palm trees and chains. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_6">6&#160;</span> And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold <span class='add'>was</span> gold of Parvaim.
<span class="verse" id="R23_7">7&#160;</span> He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the walls thereof, and the doors thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the walls. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_8">8&#160;</span> And he made the most holy house, the length whereof <span class='add'>was</span> according to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, <span class='add'>amounting</span> to six hundred talents. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_9">9&#160;</span> And the weight of the nails <span class='add'>was</span> fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_10">10&#160;</span> And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work, and overlaid them with gold.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And the wings of the cherubims <span class='add'>were</span> twenty cubits long: one wing <span class='add'>of the one cherub was</span> five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing <span class='add'>was likewise</span> five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_12">12&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>one</span> wing of the other cherub <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house: and the other wing <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits <span class='add'>also</span>, joining to the wing of the other cherub. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_13">13&#160;</span> The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their faces <span class='add'>were</span> inward.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And he made the vail <span class='add'>of</span> blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon.
<span class="verse" id="R23_15">15&#160;</span> Also he made before the house two pillars of thirty and five cubits high, and the chapiter that <span class='add'>was</span> on the top of each of them <span class='add'>was</span> five cubits.
<span class="verse" id="R23_16">16&#160;</span> And he made chains, <span class='add'>as</span> in the oracle, and put <span class='add'>them</span> on the heads of the pillars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put <span class='add'>them</span> on the chains. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_17">17&#160;</span> And he reared up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R24_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_2">2&#160;</span>¶ Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about.
<span class="verse" id="R24_3">3&#160;</span>And under it <span class='add'>was</span> the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round about: ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows of oxen <span class='add'>were</span> cast, when it was cast. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_4">4&#160;</span> It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea <span class='add'>was set</span> above upon them, and all their hinder parts <span class='add'>were</span> inward. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_5">5&#160;</span> And the thickness of it <span class='add'>was</span> an handbreadth, and the brim of it like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; <span class='add'>and</span> it received and held three thousand baths.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_6">6&#160;</span>¶ He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered for the burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea <span class='add'>was</span> for the priests to wash in.
<span class="verse" id="R24_7">7&#160;</span> And he made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and set <span class='add'>them</span> in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_8">8&#160;</span> He made also ten tables, and placed <span class='add'>them</span> in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of gold.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_10">10&#160;</span> And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over against the south. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_11">11&#160;</span> And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the house of God;
<span class="verse" id="R24_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>To wit</span>, the two pillars, and the pommels, and the chapiters <span class='add'>which were</span> on the top of the two pillars, and the two wreaths to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which <span class='add'>were</span> on the top of the pillars; 
<span class="verse" id="R24_13">13&#160;</span> And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two pommels of the chapiters which <span class='add'>were</span> upon the pillars.
<span class="verse" id="R24_14">14&#160;</span> He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases;
<span class="verse" id="R24_15">15&#160;</span> One sea, and twelve oxen under it. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_16">16&#160;</span> The pots also, and the shovels, and the fleshhooks, and all their instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of bright brass.
<span class="verse" id="R24_17">17&#160;</span> In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredathah.
<span class="verse" id="R24_18">18&#160;</span> Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance: for the weight of the brass could not be found out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_19">19&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon made all the vessels that <span class='add'>were for</span> the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread <span class='add'>was set;</span> 
<span class="verse" id="R24_20">20&#160;</span> Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after the manner before the oracle, of pure gold; 
<span class="verse" id="R24_21">21&#160;</span> And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, <span class='add'>made he of</span> gold, <span class='add'>and</span> that perfect gold;
<span class="verse" id="R24_22">22&#160;</span> And the snuffers, and the basons, and the spoons, and the censers, <span class='add'>of</span> pure gold: and the entry of the house, the inner doors thereof for the most holy <span class='add'>place</span>, and the doors of the house of the temple, <span class='add'>were of</span> gold.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R25_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R25_1">1&#160;</span> Thus all the work that Solomon made for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was finished: and Solomon brought in <span class='add'>all</span> the things that David his father had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and all the instruments, put he among the treasures of the house of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R25_2">2&#160;</span>¶ Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> out of the city of David, which <span class='add'>is</span> Zion. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_3">3&#160;</span> Wherefore all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto the king in the feast which <span class='add'>was</span> in the seventh month. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_4">4&#160;</span> And all the elders of Israel came; and the Levites took up the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_5">5&#160;</span> And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and all the holy vessels that <span class='add'>were</span> in the tabernacle, these did the priests <span class='add'>and</span> the Levites bring up. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_6">6&#160;</span> Also king Solomon, and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed sheep and oxen, which could not be told nor numbered for multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_7">7&#160;</span> And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy <span class='add'>place, even</span> under the wings of the cherubims: 
<span class="verse" id="R25_8">8&#160;</span> For the cherubims spread forth <span class='add'>their</span> wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_9">9&#160;</span> And they drew out the staves <span class='add'>of the ark</span>, that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not seen without. And there it is unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="R25_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There was</span> nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put <span class='add'>therein</span> at Horeb, when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> made <span class='add'>a covenant</span> with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.<span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R25_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass, when the priests were come out of the holy <span class='add'>place:</span> (for all the priests <span class='add'>that were</span> present were sanctified, <span class='add'>and</span> did not <span class='add'>then</span> wait by course:
<span class="verse" id="R25_12">12&#160;</span> Also the Levites <span class='add'>which were</span> the singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, <span class='add'>being</span> arrayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:) 
<span class="verse" id="R25_13">13&#160;</span> It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers <span class='add'>were</span> as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and when they lifted up <span class='add'>their</span> voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>saying</span>, For <span class='add'>he is</span> good; for his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever: that <span class='add'>then</span> the house was filled with a cloud, <span class='add'>even</span> the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; 
<span class="verse" id="R25_14">14&#160;</span> So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had filled the house of God.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R26_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_1">1&#160;</span> Then said Solomon, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said that he would dwell in the thick darkness. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_2">2&#160;</span> But I have built an house of habitation for thee, and a place for thy dwelling for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_3">3&#160;</span> And the king turned his face, and blessed the whole congregation of Israel: and all the congregation of Israel stood. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_4">4&#160;</span> And he said, Blessed <span class='add'>be</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, who hath with his hands fulfilled <span class='add'>that</span> which he spake with his mouth to my father David, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_5">5&#160;</span> Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt I chose no city among all the tribes of Israel to build an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="R26_6">6&#160;</span> But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_7">7&#160;</span> Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_8">8&#160;</span> But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my name, thou didst well in that it was in thine heart: 
<span class="verse" id="R26_9">9&#160;</span> Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but thy son which shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_10">10&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken: for I am risen up in the room of David my father, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> promised, and have built the house for the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_11">11&#160;</span> And in it have I put the ark, wherein <span class='add'>is</span> the covenant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that he made with the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And he stood before the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the presence of all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands: 
<span class="verse" id="R26_13">13&#160;</span> For Solomon had made a brasen scaffold, of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stood, and kneeled down upon his knees before all the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven,
<span class="verse" id="R26_14">14&#160;</span> And said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, <span class='add'>there is</span> no God like thee in the heaven, nor in the earth; which keepest covenant, and <span class='add'>shewest</span> mercy unto thy servants, that walk before thee with all their hearts: 
<span class="verse" id="R26_15">15&#160;</span> Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfilled <span class='add'>it</span> with thine hand, as <span class='add'>it is</span> this day. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_16">16&#160;</span> Now therefore, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so that thy children take heed to their way to walk in my law, as thou hast walked before me.
<span class="verse" id="R26_17">17&#160;</span> Now then, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_18">18&#160;</span> But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house which I have built! 
<span class="verse" id="R26_19">19&#160;</span> Have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God, to hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee: 
<span class="verse" id="R26_20">20&#160;</span> That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward this place.
<span class="verse" id="R26_21">21&#160;</span> Hearken therefore unto the supplications of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which they shall make toward this place: hear thou from thy dwelling place, <span class='add'>even</span> from heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_22">22&#160;</span>¶ If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house;
<span class="verse" id="R26_23">23&#160;</span> Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him according to his righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_24">24&#160;</span>¶ And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee; and shall return and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house;
<span class="verse" id="R26_25">25&#160;</span> Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them and to their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_26">26&#160;</span>¶ When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; <span class='add'>yet</span> if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost afflict them;
<span class="verse" id="R26_27">27&#160;</span> Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the good way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_28">28&#160;</span>¶ If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpillers; if their enemies besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or whatsoever sickness <span class='add'>there be:</span>
<span class="verse" id="R26_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Then</span> what prayer <span class='add'>or</span> what supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know his own sore and his own grief, and shall spread forth his hands in this house:
<span class="verse" id="R26_30">30&#160;</span> Then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, and render unto every man according unto all his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men:) 
<span class="verse" id="R26_31">31&#160;</span> That they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name’s sake, and thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in this house;
<span class="verse" id="R26_33">33&#160;</span> Then hear thou from the heavens, <span class='add'>even</span> from thy dwelling place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to thee for; that all people of the earth may know thy name, and fear thee, as <span class='add'>doth</span> thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.
<span class="verse" id="R26_34">34&#160;</span> If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thee toward this city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_35">35&#160;</span> Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.
<span class="verse" id="R26_36">36&#160;</span> If they sin against thee, (for <span class='add'>there is</span> no man which sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before <span class='add'>their</span> enemies, and they carry them away captives unto a land far off or near;
<span class="verse" id="R26_37">37&#160;</span>Yet <span class='add'>if</span> they bethink themselves in the land whither they are carried captive, and turn and pray unto thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and have dealt wickedly;
<span class="verse" id="R26_38">38&#160;</span> If they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have carried them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and <span class='add'>toward</span> the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name: 
<span class="verse" id="R26_39">39&#160;</span> Then hear thou from the heavens, <span class='add'>even</span> from thy dwelling place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have sinned against thee.
<span class="verse" id="R26_40">40&#160;</span> Now, my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and <span class='add'>let</span> thine ears <span class='add'>be</span> attent unto the prayer <span class='add'>that is made</span> in this place.
<span class="verse" id="R26_41">41&#160;</span> Now therefore arise, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in goodness. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_42">42&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember the mercies of David thy servant.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R27_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_1">1&#160;</span> Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> filled the house. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_2">2&#160;</span> And the priests could not enter into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had filled the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> house. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_3">3&#160;</span> And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>saying</span>, For <span class='add'>he is</span> good; for his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_5">5&#160;</span> And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep: so the king and all the people dedicated the house of God. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_6">6&#160;</span> And the priests waited on their offices: the Levites also with instruments of musick of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which David the king had made to praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever, when David praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before them, and all Israel stood.
<span class="verse" id="R27_7">7&#160;</span> Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that <span class='add'>was</span> before the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: for there he offered burnt offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offerings, and the meat offerings, and the fat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_9">9&#160;</span> And in the eighth day they made a solemn assembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.
<span class="verse" id="R27_10">10&#160;</span> And on the three and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the people away into their tents, glad and merry in heart for the goodness that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_11">11&#160;</span> Thus Solomon finished the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the king’s house: and all that came into Solomon’s heart to make in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and in his own house, he prosperously effected. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of sacrifice. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_13">13&#160;</span> If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people; 
<span class="verse" id="R27_14">14&#160;</span> If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
<span class="verse" id="R27_15">15&#160;</span> Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer <span class='add'>that is made</span> in this place.
<span class="verse" id="R27_16">16&#160;</span> For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_17">17&#160;</span> And as for thee, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments; 
<span class="verse" id="R27_18">18&#160;</span> Then will I stablish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I have covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man <span class='add'>to be</span> ruler in Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R27_19">19&#160;</span> But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments, which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them; 
<span class="verse" id="R27_20">20&#160;</span> Then will I pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified for my name, will I cast out of my sight, and will make it <span class='add'>to be</span> a proverb and a byword among all nations. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_21">21&#160;</span> And this house, which is high, shall be an astonishment to every one that passeth by it; so that he shall say, Why hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> done thus unto this land, and unto this house? 
<span class="verse" id="R27_22">22&#160;</span> And it shall be answered, Because they forsook the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshipped them, and served them: therefore hath he brought all this evil upon them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R28_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his own house, 
<span class="verse" id="R28_2">2&#160;</span> That the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_3">3&#160;</span> And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and prevailed against it. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_4">4&#160;</span> And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store cities, which he built in Hamath. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_5">5&#160;</span> Also he built Beth-horon the upper, and Beth-horon the nether, fenced cities, with walls, gates, and bars; 
<span class="verse" id="R28_6">6&#160;</span> And Baalath, and all the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout all the land of his dominion.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_7">7&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>As for</span> all the people <span class='add'>that were</span> left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which <span class='add'>were</span> not of Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="R28_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> of their children, who were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_9">9&#160;</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work; but they <span class='add'>were</span> men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and horsemen. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_10">10&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>were</span> the chief of king Solomon’s officers, <span class='add'>even</span> two hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because <span class='add'>the places are</span> holy, whereunto the ark of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath come.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then Solomon offered burnt offerings unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> on the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, which he had built before the porch, 
<span class="verse" id="R28_13">13&#160;</span> Even after a certain rate every day, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the solemn feasts, three times in the year, <span class='add'>even</span> in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And he appointed, according to the order of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate: for so had David the man of God commanded.
<span class="verse" id="R28_15">15&#160;</span> And they departed not from the commandment of the king unto the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_16">16&#160;</span> Now all the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the foundation of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and until it was finished. <span class='add'>So</span> the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was perfected. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then went Solomon to Ezion-geber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in the land of Edom.
<span class="verse" id="R28_18">18&#160;</span> And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought <span class='add'>them</span> to king Solomon.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R29_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_1">1&#160;</span> And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_2">2&#160;</span> And Solomon told her all her questions: and there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_3">3&#160;</span> And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built, 
<span class="verse" id="R29_4">4&#160;</span> And the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel; his cupbearers also, and their apparel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; there was no more spirit in her.
<span class="verse" id="R29_5">5&#160;</span> And she said to the king, <span class='add'>It was</span> a true report which I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom:
<span class="verse" id="R29_6">6&#160;</span> Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen <span class='add'>it:</span> and, behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me: <span class='add'>for</span> thou exceedest the fame that I heard. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_7">7&#160;</span> Happy <span class='add'>are</span> thy men, and happy <span class='add'>are</span> these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_8">8&#160;</span> Blessed be the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on his throne, <span class='add'>to be</span> king for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment and justice. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_9">9&#160;</span> And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave king Solomon. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_10">10&#160;</span> And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.
<span class="verse" id="R29_11">11&#160;</span> And the king made <span class='add'>of</span> the algum trees terraces to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to the king’s palace, and harps and psalteries for singers: and there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="R29_12">12&#160;</span> And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside <span class='add'>that</span> which she had brought unto the king. So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and threescore and six talents of gold; 
<span class="verse" id="R29_14">14&#160;</span>Beside <span class='add'>that which</span> chapmen and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And king Solomon made two hundred targets <span class='add'>of</span> beaten gold: six hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of beaten gold went to one target. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_16">16&#160;</span> And three hundred shields <span class='add'>made he of</span> beaten gold: three hundred <span class='add'>shekels</span> of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_17">17&#160;</span> Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_18">18&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>there were</span> six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, <span class='add'>which were</span> fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the sitting place, and two lions standing by the stays:
<span class="verse" id="R29_19">19&#160;</span> And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And all the drinking vessels of king Solomon <span class='add'>were of</span> gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon <span class='add'>were of</span> pure gold: none <span class='add'>were of</span> silver; it was <span class='add'>not</span> any thing accounted of in the days of Solomon.
<span class="verse" id="R29_21">21&#160;</span> For the king’s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram: every three years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
<span class="verse" id="R29_22">22&#160;</span> And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_24">24&#160;</span> And they brought every man his present, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, harness, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And he reigned over all the kings from the river even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.
<span class="verse" id="R29_27">27&#160;</span> And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trees made he as the sycomore trees that <span class='add'>are</span> in the low plains in abundance.
<span class="verse" id="R29_28">28&#160;</span> And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of all lands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat?
<span class="verse" id="R29_30">30&#160;</span> And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_31">31&#160;</span> And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R210_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_1">1&#160;</span> And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were all Israel come to make him king. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_2">2&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who <span class='add'>was</span> in Egypt, whither he had fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard <span class='add'>it</span>, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_3">3&#160;</span> And they sent and called him. So Jeroboam and all Israel came and spake to Rehoboam, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R210_4">4&#160;</span> Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we will serve thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_5">5&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Come again unto me after three days. And the people departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye <span class='add'>me</span> to return answer to this people? 
<span class="verse" id="R210_7">7&#160;</span> And they spake unto him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_8">8&#160;</span> But he forsook the counsel which the old men gave him, and took counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stood before him. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us? 
<span class="verse" id="R210_10">10&#160;</span> And the young men that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou <span class='add'>it</span> somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little <span class='add'>finger</span> shall be thicker than my father’s loins. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_11">11&#160;</span> For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I will put more to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I <span class='add'>will chastise you</span> with scorpions.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_12">12&#160;</span> So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_13">13&#160;</span> And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men, 
<span class="verse" id="R210_14">14&#160;</span> And answered them after the advice of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I <span class='add'>will chastise you</span> with scorpions. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_15">15&#160;</span> So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of God, that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> might perform his word, which he spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And when all Israel <span class='add'> saw </span> that the king would not hearken unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? and <span class='add'>we have</span> none inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to your tents, O Israel: <span class='add'>and</span> now, David, see to thine own house. So all Israel went to their tents. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_17">17&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>as for</span> the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_18">18&#160;</span> Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that <span class='add'>was</span> over the tribute; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to <span class='add'>his</span> chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="R210_19">19&#160;</span> And Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this day.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R211_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_1">1&#160;</span> And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen <span class='add'>men</span>, which were warriors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_2">2&#160;</span> But the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_3">3&#160;</span> Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_4">4&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and returned from going against Jeroboam. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_6">6&#160;</span> He built even Beth-lehem, and Etam, and Tekoa, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_7">7&#160;</span> And Beth-zur, and Shoco, and Adullam, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_8">8&#160;</span> And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_9">9&#160;</span> And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_10">10&#160;</span> And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which <span class='add'>are</span> in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_11">11&#160;</span> And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and store of victual, and of oil and wine. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_12">12&#160;</span> And in every several city <span class='add'>he put</span> shields and spears, and made them exceeding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And the priests and the Levites that <span class='add'>were</span> in all Israel resorted to him out of all their coasts.
<span class="verse" id="R211_14">14&#160;</span> For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them off from executing the priest’s office unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="R211_15">15&#160;</span> And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_16">16&#160;</span> And after them out of all the tribes of Israel such as set their hearts to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_17">17&#160;</span> So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years: for three years they walked in the way of David and Solomon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And Rehoboam took him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David to wife, <span class='add'>and</span> Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse; 
<span class="verse" id="R211_19">19&#160;</span> Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_20">20&#160;</span> And after her he took Maachah the daughter of Absalom; which bare him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.
<span class="verse" id="R211_21">21&#160;</span> And Rehoboam loved Maachah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen wives, and threescore concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and threescore daughters.) 
<span class="verse" id="R211_22">22&#160;</span> And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Maachah the chief, <span class='add'>to be</span> ruler among his brethren: for <span class='add'>he thought</span> to make him king. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_23">23&#160;</span> And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of all his children throughout all the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many wives.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R212_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_1">1&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and all Israel with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_2">2&#160;</span>And it came to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> in the fifth year of king Rehoboam Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="R212_3">3&#160;</span> With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen: and the people <span class='add'>were</span> without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Sukkiims, and the Ethiopians. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_4">4&#160;</span> And he took the fenced cities which <span class='add'>pertained</span> to Judah, and came to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and <span class='add'>to</span> the princes of Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said unto them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_6">6&#160;</span> Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> righteous. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_7">7&#160;</span> And when the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; <span class='add'>therefore</span> I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance; and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
<span class="verse" id="R212_8">8&#160;</span> Nevertheless they shall be his servants; that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_9">9&#160;</span> So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the treasures of the king’s house; he took all: he carried away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_10">10&#160;</span> Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of brass, and committed <span class='add'>them</span> to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of the king’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_11">11&#160;</span> And when the king entered into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the guard came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_12">12&#160;</span> And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> turned from him, that he would not destroy <span class='add'>him</span> altogether: and also in Judah things went well.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_13">13&#160;</span>¶ So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam <span class='add'>was</span> one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Naamah an Ammonitess. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_14">14&#160;</span> And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R212_15">15&#160;</span> Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning genealogies? And <span class='add'>there were</span> wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
<span class="verse" id="R212_16">16&#160;</span> And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R213_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_1">1&#160;</span> Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_2">2&#160;</span> He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also <span class='add'>was</span> Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_3">3&#160;</span> And Abijah set the battle in array with an army of valiant men of war, <span class='add'>even</span> four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, <span class='add'>being</span> mighty men of valour.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which <span class='add'>is</span> in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and all Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="R213_5">5&#160;</span> Ought ye not to know that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, <span class='add'>even</span> to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt? 
<span class="verse" id="R213_6">6&#160;</span> Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and hath rebelled against his lord. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_7">7&#160;</span> And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_8">8&#160;</span> And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the hand of the sons of David; and ye <span class='add'>be</span> a great multitude, and <span class='add'>there are</span> with you golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_9">9&#160;</span> Have ye not cast out the priests of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nations of <span class='add'>other</span> lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, <span class='add'>the same</span> may be a priest of <span class='add'>them that are</span> no gods.
<span class="verse" id="R213_10">10&#160;</span> But as for us, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>are</span> the sons of Aaron, and the Levites <span class='add'>wait</span> upon <span class='add'>their</span> business: 
<span class="verse" id="R213_11">11&#160;</span> And they burn unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and sweet incense: the shewbread also <span class='add'>set they in order</span> upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God; but ye have forsaken him. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_12">12&#160;</span> And, behold, God himself <span class='add'>is</span> with us for <span class='add'>our</span> captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_13">13&#160;</span>¶ But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambushment <span class='add'>was</span> behind them. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_14">14&#160;</span> And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle <span class='add'>was</span> before and behind: and they cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the priests sounded with the trumpets. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_15">15&#160;</span> Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_16">16&#160;</span> And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_17">17&#160;</span> And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_18">18&#160;</span> Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_19">19&#160;</span> And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Beth-el with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephrain with the towns thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_20">20&#160;</span> Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> struck him, and he died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_21">21&#160;</span>¶ But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_22">22&#160;</span> And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, <span class='add'>are</span> written in the story of the prophet Iddo.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R214_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_1">1&#160;</span> So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_2">2&#160;</span> And Asa did <span class='add'>that which was</span> good and right in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God: 
<span class="verse" id="R214_3">3&#160;</span> For he took away the altars of the strange <span class='add'>gods</span>, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves:
<span class="verse" id="R214_4">4&#160;</span> And commanded Judah to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_5">5&#160;</span> Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had given him rest. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_7">7&#160;</span> Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about <span class='add'>them</span> walls, and towers, gates, and bars, <span class='add'>while</span> the land <span class='add'>is</span> yet before us; because we have sought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, we have sought <span class='add'>him</span>, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_8">8&#160;</span> And Asa had an army <span class='add'>of men</span> that bare targets and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these <span class='add'>were</span> mighty men of valour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_10">10&#160;</span> Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_11">11&#160;</span> And Asa cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, and said, <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>it is</span> nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou <span class='add'>art</span> our God; let not man prevail against thee.
<span class="verse" id="R214_12">12&#160;</span> So the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_13">13&#160;</span> And Asa and the people that <span class='add'>were</span> with him pursued them unto Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and before his host; and they carried away very much spoil.
<span class="verse" id="R214_14">14&#160;</span> And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there was exceeding much spoil in them. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_15">15&#160;</span> They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R215_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_1">1&#160;</span> And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded: 
<span class="verse" id="R215_2">2&#160;</span> And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin; The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
<span class="verse" id="R215_3">3&#160;</span> Now for a long season Israel <span class='add'>hath been</span> without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_4">4&#160;</span> But when they in their trouble did turn unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_5">5&#160;</span> And in those times <span class='add'>there was</span> no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations <span class='add'>were</span> upon all the inhabitants of the countries. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_6">6&#160;</span> And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all adversity.
<span class="verse" id="R215_7">7&#160;</span> Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shall be rewarded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_8">8&#160;</span> And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that <span class='add'>was</span> before the porch of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R215_9">9&#160;</span> And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God <span class='add'>was</span> with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_10">10&#160;</span> So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_11">11&#160;</span> And they offered unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the same time, of the spoil <span class='add'>which</span> they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.
<span class="verse" id="R215_12">12&#160;</span> And they entered into a covenant to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers with all their heart and with all their soul; 
<span class="verse" id="R215_13">13&#160;</span> That whosoever would not seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_14">14&#160;</span> And they sware unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_15">15&#160;</span> And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> gave them rest round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And also <span class='add'>concerning</span> Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from <span class='add'>being</span> queen, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped <span class='add'>it</span>, and burnt <span class='add'>it</span> at the brook Kidron.
<span class="verse" id="R215_17">17&#160;</span> But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_19">19&#160;</span>And there was no <span class='add'>more</span> war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R216_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_1">1&#160;</span> In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_2">2&#160;</span> Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and of the king’s house, and sent to Ben-hadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying,
<span class="verse" id="R216_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a league between me and thee, as <span class='add'>there was</span> between my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_4">4&#160;</span> And Ben-hadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-maim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.
<span class="verse" id="R216_5">5&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when Baasha heard <span class='add'>it</span>, that he left off building of Ramah, and let his work cease. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_6">6&#160;</span> Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_8">8&#160;</span> Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he delivered them into thine hand.
<span class="verse" id="R216_9">9&#160;</span> For the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of <span class='add'>them</span> whose heart <span class='add'>is</span> perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars.
<span class="verse" id="R216_10">10&#160;</span> Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house; for <span class='add'>he was</span> in a rage with him because of this <span class='add'>thing</span>. And Asa oppressed <span class='add'>some</span> of the people the same time.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_12">12&#160;</span> And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in his feet, until his disease <span class='add'>was</span> exceeding <span class='add'>great:</span> yet in his disease he sought not to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but to the physicians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_14">14&#160;</span> And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odours and divers kinds <span class='add'>of spices</span> prepared by the apothecaries’ art: and they made a very great burning for him.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R217_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_1">1&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_2">2&#160;</span> And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_3">3&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim;
<span class="verse" id="R217_4">4&#160;</span> But sought to the <span class='add'> <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance.
<span class="verse" id="R217_6">6&#160;</span> And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: moreover he took away the high places and groves out of Judah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, <span class='add'>even</span> to Ben-hail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_8">8&#160;</span>And with them <span class='add'>he sent</span> Levites, <span class='add'>even</span> Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_9">9&#160;</span> And they taught in Judah, and <span class='add'>had</span> the book of the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that <span class='add'>were</span> round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.
<span class="verse" id="R217_11">11&#160;</span>Also <span class='add'>some</span> of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store.
<span class="verse" id="R217_13">13&#160;</span> And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valour, <span class='add'>were</span> in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_14">14&#160;</span>And these <span class='add'>are</span> the numbers of them according to the house of their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_15">15&#160;</span> And next to him <span class='add'>was</span> Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand.
<span class="verse" id="R217_16">16&#160;</span> And next him <span class='add'>was</span> Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_17">17&#160;</span> And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_18">18&#160;</span> And next him <span class='add'>was</span> Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_19">19&#160;</span> These waited on the king, beside <span class='add'>those</span> whom the king put in the fenced cities throughout all Judah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R218_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_1">1&#160;</span> Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined affinity with Ahab. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_2">2&#160;</span> And after <span class='add'>certain</span> years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that <span class='add'>he had</span> with him, and persuaded him to go up <span class='add'>with him</span> to Ramoth-gilead.
<span class="verse" id="R218_3">3&#160;</span> And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he answered him, I <span class='add'>am</span> as thou <span class='add'>art</span>, and my people as thy people; and <span class='add'>we will be</span> with thee in the war. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thee, at the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to day. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_5">5&#160;</span> Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver <span class='add'>it</span> into the king’s hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_6">6&#160;</span> But Jehoshaphat said, <span class='add'>Is there</span> not here a prophet of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> besides, that we might enquire of him?
<span class="verse" id="R218_7">7&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, <span class='add'>There is</span> yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but always evil: the same <span class='add'>is</span> Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_8">8&#160;</span> And the king of Israel called for one <span class='add'>of his</span> officers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.
<span class="verse" id="R218_9">9&#160;</span> And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in <span class='add'>their</span> robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets prophesied before them.
<span class="verse" id="R218_10">10&#160;</span> And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, With these thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed.
<span class="verse" id="R218_11">11&#160;</span> And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall deliver <span class='add'>it</span> into the hand of the king. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_12">12&#160;</span> And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets <span class='add'>declare</span> good to the king with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.
<span class="verse" id="R218_13">13&#160;</span> And Micaiah said, <span class='add'>As</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> liveth, even what my God saith, that will I speak. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_14">14&#160;</span> And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_15">15&#160;</span> And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="R218_16">16&#160;</span> Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, These have no master; let them return <span class='add'>therefore</span> every man to his house in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_17">17&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee <span class='add'>that</span> he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil?
<span class="verse" id="R218_18">18&#160;</span> Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; I saw the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and <span class='add'>on</span> his left. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_19">19&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one spake saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_20">20&#160;</span> Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, I will entice him. And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> said unto him, Wherewith? 
<span class="verse" id="R218_21">21&#160;</span> And he said, I will go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And <span class='add'>the <span class='nd'>Lord</span></span> said, Thou shalt entice <span class='add'>him</span>, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do <span class='add'>even</span> so. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_22">22&#160;</span> Now therefore, behold, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath spoken evil against thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_23">23&#160;</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> from me to speak unto thee? 
<span class="verse" id="R218_24">24&#160;</span> And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt see on that day when thou shalt go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
<span class="verse" id="R218_25">25&#160;</span> Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son; 
<span class="verse" id="R218_26">26&#160;</span> And say, Thus saith the king, Put this <span class='add'>fellow</span> in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_27">27&#160;</span> And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, <span class='add'>then</span> hath not the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, all ye people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_28">28&#160;</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_29">29&#160;</span> And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and will go to the battle; but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_30">30&#160;</span> Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of the chariots that <span class='add'>were</span> with him, saying, Fight ye not with small or great, save only with the king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_31">31&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It <span class='add'>is</span> the king of Israel. Therefore they compassed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> helped him; and God moved them <span class='add'>to depart</span> from him. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_32">32&#160;</span> For it came to pass, that, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from pursuing him.
<span class="verse" id="R218_33">33&#160;</span>And a <span class='add'>certain</span> man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the harness: therefore he said to his chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest carry me out of the host; for I am wounded.
<span class="verse" id="R218_34">34&#160;</span> And the battle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed <span class='add'>himself</span> up in <span class='add'>his</span> chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about the time of the sun going down he died.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R219_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R219_1">1&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_2">2&#160;</span> And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? therefore <span class='add'>is</span> wrath upon thee from before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_3">3&#160;</span> Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_4">4&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the people from Beer-sheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R219_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And he set judges in the land throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city, 
<span class="verse" id="R219_6">6&#160;</span> And said to the judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, who <span class='add'>is</span> with you in the judgment.
<span class="verse" id="R219_7">7&#160;</span> Wherefore now let the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> be upon you; take heed and do <span class='add'>it:</span> for <span class='add'>there is</span> no iniquity with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R219_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and <span class='add'>of</span> the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_9">9&#160;</span> And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, faithfully, and with a perfect heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_10">10&#160;</span> And what cause soever shall come to you of your brethren that dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and judgments, ye shall even warn them that they trespass not against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>so</span> wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shall not trespass. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_11">11&#160;</span> And, behold, Amariah the chief priest <span class='add'>is</span> over you in all matters of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for all the king’s matters: also the Levites <span class='add'>shall be</span> officers before you. Deal courageously, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be with the good.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R220_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_1">1&#160;</span> It came to pass after this also, <span class='add'>that</span> the children of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them <span class='add'>other</span> beside the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_2">2&#160;</span> Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they <span class='add'>be</span> in Hazazon-tamar, which <span class='add'>is</span> En-gedi. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_3">3&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
<span class="verse" id="R220_4">4&#160;</span> And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask <span class='add'>help</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, before the new court, 
<span class="verse" id="R220_6">6&#160;</span> And said, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of our fathers, <span class='add'>art</span> not thou God in heaven? and rulest <span class='add'>not</span> thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand <span class='add'>is there not</span> power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? 
<span class="verse" id="R220_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Art</span> not thou our God, <span class='add'>who</span> didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?
<span class="verse" id="R220_8">8&#160;</span> And they dwelt therein, and have built thee a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R220_9">9&#160;</span>If, <span class='add'>when</span> evil cometh upon us, <span class='add'>as</span> the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name <span class='add'>is</span> in this house,) and cry unto thee in our affliction, then thou wilt hear and help. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_10">10&#160;</span> And now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not; 
<span class="verse" id="R220_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, <span class='add'>I say, how</span> they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou hast given us to inherit. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_12">12&#160;</span> O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes <span class='add'>are</span> upon thee. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_13">13&#160;</span> And all Judah stood before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, with their little ones, their wives, and their children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in the midst of the congregation; 
<span class="verse" id="R220_15">15&#160;</span> And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> unto you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the battle <span class='add'>is</span> not yours, but God’s. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_16">16&#160;</span> To morrow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliff of Ziz; and ye shall find them at the end of the brook, before the wilderness of Jeruel.
<span class="verse" id="R220_17">17&#160;</span>Ye shall not <span class='add'>need</span> to fight in this <span class='add'>battle:</span> set yourselves, stand ye <span class='add'>still</span>, and see the salvation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to morrow go out against them: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>will be</span> with you. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_18">18&#160;</span> And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with <span class='add'>his</span> face to the ground: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, worshipping the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_19">19&#160;</span> And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stood up to praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel with a loud voice on high. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, so shall ye be established; believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_21">21&#160;</span> And when he had consulted with the people, he appointed singers unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for his mercy <span class='add'>endureth</span> for ever.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And when they began to sing and to praise, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smitten.
<span class="verse" id="R220_23">23&#160;</span> For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, utterly to slay and destroy <span class='add'>them:</span> and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another.
<span class="verse" id="R220_24">24&#160;</span> And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderness, they looked unto the multitude, and, behold, they <span class='add'>were</span> dead bodies fallen to the earth, and none escaped.
<span class="verse" id="R220_25">25&#160;</span> And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away: and they were three days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_26">26&#160;</span>¶ And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Berachah; for there they blessed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: therefore the name of the same place was called, The valley of Berachah, unto this day.
<span class="verse" id="R220_27">27&#160;</span> Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had made them to rejoice over their enemies.
<span class="verse" id="R220_28">28&#160;</span> And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_29">29&#160;</span> And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of <span class='add'>those</span> countries, when they had heard that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> fought against the enemies of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_30">30&#160;</span> So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_31">31&#160;</span>¶ And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: <span class='add'>he was</span> thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_32">32&#160;</span> And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_33">33&#160;</span> Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_34">34&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who <span class='add'>is</span> mentioned in the book of the kings of Israel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_35">35&#160;</span>¶ And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly: 
<span class="verse" id="R220_36">36&#160;</span> And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Ezion-geber. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_37">37&#160;</span> Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R221_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_1">1&#160;</span> Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_2">2&#160;</span> And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: all these <span class='add'>were</span> the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_3">3&#160;</span> And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram; because he <span class='add'>was</span> the firstborn. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_4">4&#160;</span> Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and <span class='add'>divers</span> also of the princes of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Jehoram <span class='add'>was</span> thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_6">6&#160;</span> And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_7">7&#160;</span> Howbeit the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_8">8&#160;</span>¶ In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king.
<span class="verse" id="R221_9">9&#160;</span> Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and all his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compassed him in, and the captains of the chariots. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_10">10&#160;</span> So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. The same time <span class='add'>also</span> did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he had forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_11">11&#160;</span> Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah <span class='add'>thereto</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah, 
<span class="verse" id="R221_13">13&#160;</span> But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father’s house, <span class='add'>which were</span> better than thyself: 
<span class="verse" id="R221_14">14&#160;</span> Behold, with a great plague will the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and all thy goods:
<span class="verse" id="R221_15">15&#160;</span>And thou <span class='add'>shalt have</span> great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Moreover the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that <span class='add'>were</span> near the Ethiopians: 
<span class="verse" id="R221_17">17&#160;</span> And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king’s house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_18">18&#160;</span>¶ And after all this the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_19">19&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that in process of time, after the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness: so he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_20">20&#160;</span> Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R222_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R222_1">1&#160;</span> And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_2">2&#160;</span> Forty and two years old <span class='add'>was</span> Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also <span class='add'>was</span> Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_3">3&#160;</span> He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_4">4&#160;</span> Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> like the house of Ahab: for they were his counsellors after the death of his father to his destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R222_5">5&#160;</span>¶ He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead: and the Syrians smote Joram. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_6">6&#160;</span> And he returned to be healed in Jezreel because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezreel, because he was sick.
<span class="verse" id="R222_7">7&#160;</span> And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.
<span class="verse" id="R222_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_9">9&#160;</span> And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he <span class='add'>is</span> the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with all his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R222_10">10&#160;</span>¶ But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the seed royal of the house of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_11">11&#160;</span> But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king’s sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not.
<span class="verse" id="R222_12">12&#160;</span> And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R223_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_1">1&#160;</span> And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_2">2&#160;</span> And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_3">3&#160;</span> And all the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king’s son shall reign, as the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath said of the sons of David. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_4">4&#160;</span>This <span class='add'>is</span> the thing that ye shall do; A third part of you entering on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, <span class='add'>shall be</span> porters of the doors;
<span class="verse" id="R223_5">5&#160;</span> And a third part <span class='add'>shall be</span> at the king’s house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and all the people <span class='add'>shall be</span> in the courts of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_6">6&#160;</span> But let none come into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shall go in, for they <span class='add'>are</span> holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_7">7&#160;</span> And the Levites shall compass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever <span class='add'>else</span> cometh into the house, he shall be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_8">8&#160;</span> So the Levites and all Judah did according to all things that Jehoiada the priest had commanded, and took every man his men that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that were to go <span class='add'>out</span> on the sabbath: for Jehoiada the priest dismissed not the courses. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_9">9&#160;</span> Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that <span class='add'>had been</span> king David’s, which <span class='add'>were</span> in the house of God. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_10">10&#160;</span> And he set all the people, every man having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about.
<span class="verse" id="R223_11">11&#160;</span> Then they brought out the king’s son, and put upon him the crown, and <span class='add'>gave him</span> the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="R223_13">13&#160;</span> And she looked, and, behold, the king stood at his pillar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and all the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason.
<span class="verse" id="R223_14">14&#160;</span> Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso followeth her, let him be slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_15">15&#160;</span> So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king’s house, they slew her there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_16">16&#160;</span>¶ And Jehoiada made a covenant between him, and between all the people, and between the king, that they should be the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> people. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_17">17&#160;</span> Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_18">18&#160;</span> Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to offer the burnt offerings of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as <span class='add'>it is</span> written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, <span class='add'>as it was ordained</span> by David.
<span class="verse" id="R223_19">19&#160;</span> And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that none <span class='add'>which was</span> unclean in any thing should enter in. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_20">20&#160;</span> And he took the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and they came through the high gate into the king’s house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_21">21&#160;</span> And all the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R224_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_1">1&#160;</span> Joash <span class='add'>was</span> seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also <span class='add'>was</span> Zibiah of Beer-sheba. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_2">2&#160;</span> And Joash did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all the days of Jehoiada the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_3">3&#160;</span> And Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass after this, <span class='add'>that</span> Joash was minded to repair the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R224_5">5&#160;</span> And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of all Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and see that ye hasten the matter. Howbeit the Levites hastened <span class='add'>it</span> not. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_6">6&#160;</span> And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the collection, <span class='add'>according to the commandment</span> of Moses the servant of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witness? 
<span class="verse" id="R224_7">7&#160;</span> For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> did they bestow upon Baalim. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_8">8&#160;</span> And at the king’s commandment they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_9">9&#160;</span> And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> the collection <span class='add'>that</span> Moses the servant of God <span class='add'>laid</span> upon Israel in the wilderness.
<span class="verse" id="R224_10">10&#160;</span> And all the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_11">11&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king’s office by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that <span class='add'>there was</span> much money, the king’s scribe and the high priest’s officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to his place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_12">12&#160;</span> And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and also such as wrought iron and brass to mend the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_13">13&#160;</span> So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it.
<span class="verse" id="R224_14">14&#160;</span> And when they had finished <span class='add'>it</span>, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made vessels for the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>even</span> vessels to minister, and to offer <span class='add'>withal</span>, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> continually all the days of Jehoiada.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_15">15&#160;</span>¶ But Jehoiada waxed old, and was full of days when he died; an hundred and thirty years old <span class='add'>was he</span> when he died. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_16">16&#160;</span> And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_17">17&#160;</span> Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_18">18&#160;</span> And they left the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespass. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_19">19&#160;</span> Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they testified against them: but they would not give ear. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_20">20&#160;</span> And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stood above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgress ye the commandments of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he hath also forsaken you.
<span class="verse" id="R224_21">21&#160;</span> And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_22">22&#160;</span> Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> look upon <span class='add'>it</span>, and require <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And it came to pass at the end of the year, <span class='add'>that</span> the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus.
<span class="verse" id="R224_24">24&#160;</span> For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers. So they executed judgment against Joash. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_25">25&#160;</span> And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_26">26&#160;</span> And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabitess.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Now <span class='add'>concerning</span> his sons, and the greatness of the burdens <span class='add'>laid</span> upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the story of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R225_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_1">1&#160;</span> Amaziah <span class='add'>was</span> twenty and five years old <span class='add'>when</span> he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Jehoaddan of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_2">2&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but not with a perfect heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_3">3&#160;</span>¶ Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his servants that had killed the king his father.
<span class="verse" id="R225_4">4&#160;</span> But he slew not their children, but <span class='add'>did</span> as <span class='add'>it is</span> written in the law in the book of Moses, where the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, according to the houses of <span class='add'>their</span> fathers, throughout all Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them three hundred thousand choice <span class='add'>men, able</span> to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_6">6&#160;</span> He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred talents of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_7">7&#160;</span> But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> not with Israel, <span class='add'>to wit, with</span> all the children of Ephraim. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_8">8&#160;</span> But if thou wilt go, do <span class='add'>it</span>, be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast down. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_9">9&#160;</span> And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is able to give thee much more than this.
<span class="verse" id="R225_10">10&#160;</span> Then Amaziah separated them, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_11">11&#160;</span>¶ And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_12">12&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>other</span> ten thousand <span class='add'>left</span> alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_13">13&#160;</span>¶ But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Beth-horon, and smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up <span class='add'>to be</span> his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_15">15&#160;</span> Wherefore the anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was kindled against Amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand? 
<span class="verse" id="R225_16">16&#160;</span> And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that <span class='add'>the king</span> said unto him, Art thou made of the king’s counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us see one another in the face. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_18">18&#160;</span> And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that <span class='add'>was</span> in Lebanon sent to the cedar that <span class='add'>was</span> in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there passed by a wild beast that <span class='add'>was</span> in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle.
<span class="verse" id="R225_19">19&#160;</span> Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smitten the Edomites; and thine heart lifteth thee up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meddle to <span class='add'>thine</span> hurt, that thou shouldest fall, <span class='add'>even</span> thou, and Judah with thee? 
<span class="verse" id="R225_20">20&#160;</span> But Amaziah would not hear; for it <span class='add'>came</span> of God, that he might deliver them into the hand <span class='add'>of their enemies</span>, because they sought after the gods of Edom. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_21">21&#160;</span> So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the face, <span class='add'>both</span> he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Beth-shemesh, which <span class='add'>belongeth</span> to Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_22">22&#160;</span> And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.
<span class="verse" id="R225_23">23&#160;</span> And Joash the king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
<span class="verse" id="R225_24">24&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>he took</span> all the gold and the silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-edom, and the treasures of the king’s house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_26">26&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there.
<span class="verse" id="R225_28">28&#160;</span> And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R226_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_1">1&#160;</span> Then all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who <span class='add'>was</span> sixteen years old, and made him king in the room of his father Amaziah.
<span class="verse" id="R226_2">2&#160;</span> He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_3">3&#160;</span> Sixteen years old <span class='add'>was</span> Uzziah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also <span class='add'>was</span> Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_4">4&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to all that his father Amaziah did. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_5">5&#160;</span> And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, God made him to prosper.
<span class="verse" id="R226_6">6&#160;</span> And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and brake down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines.
<span class="verse" id="R226_7">7&#160;</span> And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gur-baal, and the Mehunims. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_8">8&#160;</span> And the Ammonites gave gifts to Uzziah: and his name spread abroad <span class='add'>even</span> to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened <span class='add'>himself</span> exceedingly.
<span class="verse" id="R226_9">9&#160;</span> Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning <span class='add'>of the wall</span>, and fortified them.
<span class="verse" id="R226_10">10&#160;</span> Also he built towers in the desert, and digged many wells: for he had much cattle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen <span class='add'>also</span>, and vine dressers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry.
<span class="verse" id="R226_11">11&#160;</span> Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according to the number of their account by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, <span class='add'>one</span> of the king’s captains. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_12">12&#160;</span> The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour <span class='add'>were</span> two thousand and six hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_13">13&#160;</span> And under their hand <span class='add'>was</span> an army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.
<span class="verse" id="R226_14">14&#160;</span> And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings <span class='add'>to cast</span> stones.
<span class="verse" id="R226_15">15&#160;</span> And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_16">16&#160;</span>¶ But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to <span class='add'>his</span> destruction: for he transgressed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, and went into the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to burn incense upon the altar of incense. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_17">17&#160;</span> And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>that were</span> valiant men: 
<span class="verse" id="R226_18">18&#160;</span> And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, <span class='add'>It appertaineth</span> not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespassed; neither <span class='add'>shall it be</span> for thine honour from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_19">19&#160;</span> Then Uzziah was wroth, and <span class='add'>had</span> a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, from beside the incense altar. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_20">20&#160;</span> And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he <span class='add'>was</span> leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had smitten him. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_21">21&#160;</span> And Uzziah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, <span class='add'>being</span> a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and Jotham his son <span class='add'>was</span> over the king’s house, judging the people of the land.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_23">23&#160;</span> So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which <span class='add'>belonged</span> to the kings; for they said, He <span class='add'>is</span> a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R227_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R227_1">1&#160;</span> Jotham <span class='add'>was</span> twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name also <span class='add'>was</span> Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_2">2&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to all that his father Uzziah did: howbeit he entered not into the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And the people did yet corruptly. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_3">3&#160;</span> He built the high gate of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.
<span class="verse" id="R227_4">4&#160;</span> Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R227_5">5&#160;</span>¶ He fought also with the king of the Ammonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave him the same year an hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Ammon pay unto him, both the second year, and the third.
<span class="verse" id="R227_6">6&#160;</span> So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R227_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, lo, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_8">8&#160;</span> He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R227_9">9&#160;</span>¶ And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R228_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_1">1&#160;</span> Ahaz <span class='add'>was</span> twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: but he did not <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, like David his father: 
<span class="verse" id="R228_2">2&#160;</span> For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Baalim. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_3">3&#160;</span> Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had cast out before the children of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R228_4">4&#160;</span> He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_5">5&#160;</span> Wherefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and carried away a great multitude of them captives, and brought <span class='add'>them</span> to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_6">6&#160;</span>¶ For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, <span class='add'>which were</span> all valiant men; because they had forsaken the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="R228_7">7&#160;</span> And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Maaseiah the king’s son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah <span class='add'>that was</span> next to the king.
<span class="verse" id="R228_8">8&#160;</span> And the children of Israel carried away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_9">9&#160;</span> But a prophet of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was there, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Oded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage <span class='add'>that</span> reacheth up unto heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_10">10&#160;</span> And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: <span class='add'>but are there</span> not with you, even with you, sins against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God? 
<span class="verse" id="R228_11">11&#160;</span> Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> upon you. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_12">12&#160;</span> Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the war, 
<span class="verse" id="R228_13">13&#160;</span> And said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the captives hither: for whereas we have offended against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>already</span>, ye intend to add <span class='add'>more</span> to our sins and to our trespass: for our trespass is great, and <span class='add'>there is</span> fierce wrath against Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_14">14&#160;</span> So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and all the congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_15">15&#160;</span> And the men which were expressed by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all that were naked among them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon asses, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brethren: then they returned to Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_16">16&#160;</span>¶ At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assyria to help him. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_17">17&#160;</span> For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.
<span class="verse" id="R228_18">18&#160;</span> The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo also and the villages thereof: and they dwelt there. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_19">19&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgressed sore against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_20">20&#160;</span> And Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria came unto him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_21">21&#160;</span> For Ahaz took away a portion <span class='add'>out</span> of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and <span class='add'>out</span> of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave <span class='add'>it</span> unto the king of Assyria: but he helped him not. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_22">22&#160;</span>¶ And in the time of his distress did he trespass yet more against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: this <span class='add'>is that</span> king Ahaz. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_23">23&#160;</span> For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, <span class='add'>therefore</span> will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R228_24">24&#160;</span> And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_25">25&#160;</span> And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of his fathers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_26">26&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of his acts and of all his ways, first and last, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_27">27&#160;</span> And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, <span class='add'>even</span> in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R229_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_1">1&#160;</span> Hezekiah began to reign <span class='add'>when he was</span> five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name <span class='add'>was</span> Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_2">2&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to all that David his father had done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_3">3&#160;</span>¶ He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the doors of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and repaired them. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_4">4&#160;</span> And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east street, 
<span class="verse" id="R229_5">5&#160;</span> And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy <span class='add'>place</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_6">6&#160;</span> For our fathers have trespassed, and done <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and turned <span class='add'>their</span> backs.
<span class="verse" id="R229_7">7&#160;</span> Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy <span class='add'>place</span> unto the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_8">8&#160;</span> Wherefore the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hissing, as ye see with your eyes.
<span class="verse" id="R229_9">9&#160;</span> For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives <span class='add'>are</span> in captivity for this. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_10">10&#160;</span>Now <span class='add'>it is</span> in mine heart to make a covenant with the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_11">11&#160;</span> My sons, be not now negligent: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah: 
<span class="verse" id="R229_13">13&#160;</span> And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; Zechariah, and Mattaniah: 
<span class="verse" id="R229_14">14&#160;</span> And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uzziel. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_15">15&#160;</span> And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to cleanse the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.<span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="R229_16">16&#160;</span> And the priests went into the inner part of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to cleanse <span class='add'>it</span>, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> into the court of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And the Levites took <span class='add'>it</span>, to carry <span class='add'>it</span> out abroad into the brook Kidron. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_17">17&#160;</span> Now they began on the first <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: so they sanctified the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in eight days; and in the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_18">18&#160;</span> Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have cleansed all the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the altar of burnt offering, with all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread table, with all the vessels thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_19">19&#160;</span> Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away in his transgression, have we prepared and sanctified, and, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> before the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_21">21&#160;</span> And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer <span class='add'>them</span> on the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_22">22&#160;</span> So they killed the bullocks, and the priests received the blood, and sprinkled <span class='add'>it</span> on the altar: likewise, when they had killed the rams, they sprinkled the blood upon the altar: they killed also the lambs, and they sprinkled the blood upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_23">23&#160;</span> And they brought forth the he goats <span class='add'>for</span> the sin offering before the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them:
<span class="verse" id="R229_24">24&#160;</span> And the priests killed them, and they made reconciliation with their blood upon the altar, to make an atonement for all Israel: for the king commanded <span class='add'>that</span> the burnt offering and the sin offering <span class='add'>should be made</span> for all Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_25">25&#160;</span> And he set the Levites in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the prophet: for <span class='add'>so was</span> the commandment of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by his prophets.<span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span><a href='#FN217' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="R229_26">26&#160;</span> And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_27">27&#160;</span> And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> began <span class='add'>also</span> with the trumpets, and with the instruments <span class='add'>ordained</span> by David king of Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R229_28">28&#160;</span> And all the congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: <span class='add'>and</span> all <span class='add'>this continued</span> until the burnt offering was finished.
<span class="verse" id="R229_29">29&#160;</span> And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshipped.
<span class="verse" id="R229_30">30&#160;</span> Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_31">31&#160;</span> Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a free heart burnt offerings.
<span class="verse" id="R229_32">32&#160;</span> And the number of the burnt offerings, which the congregation brought, was threescore and ten bullocks, an hundred rams, <span class='add'>and</span> two hundred lambs: all these <span class='add'>were</span> for a burnt offering to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_33">33&#160;</span> And the consecrated things <span class='add'>were</span> six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_34">34&#160;</span> But the priests were too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt offerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, till the work was ended, and until the <span class='add'>other</span> priests had sanctified themselves: for the Levites <span class='add'>were</span> more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
<span class="verse" id="R229_35">35&#160;</span> And also the burnt offerings <span class='add'>were</span> in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings, and the drink offerings for <span class='add'>every</span> burnt offering. So the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was set in order. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_36">36&#160;</span> And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had prepared the people: for the thing was <span class='add'>done</span> suddenly.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R230_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_1">1&#160;</span> And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_2">2&#160;</span> For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second month. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_3">3&#160;</span> For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_4">4&#160;</span> And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation.
<span class="verse" id="R230_5">5&#160;</span> So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beer-sheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not done <span class='add'>it</span> of a long <span class='add'>time in such sort</span> as it was written. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_6">6&#160;</span> So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and he will return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.
<span class="verse" id="R230_7">7&#160;</span> And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers, <span class='add'>who</span> therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_8">8&#160;</span> Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers <span class='add'>were, but</span> yield yourselves unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever: and serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away from you.
<span class="verse" id="R230_9">9&#160;</span> For if ye turn again unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, your brethren and your children <span class='add'>shall find</span> compassion before them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God <span class='add'>is</span> gracious and merciful, and will not turn away <span class='add'>his</span> face from you, if ye return unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_10">10&#160;</span> So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_11">11&#160;</span> Nevertheless divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_12">12&#160;</span> Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the commandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_13">13&#160;</span>¶ And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_14">14&#160;</span> And they arose and took away the altars that <span class='add'>were</span> in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast <span class='add'>them</span> into the brook Kidron. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_15">15&#160;</span> Then they killed the passover on the fourteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the second month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt offerings into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_16">16&#160;</span> And they stood in their place after their manner, according to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blood, <span class='add'>which they received</span> of the hand of the Levites.
<span class="verse" id="R230_17">17&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>there were</span> many in the congregation that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the killing of the passovers for every one <span class='add'>that was</span> not clean, to sanctify <span class='add'>them</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_18">18&#160;</span> For a multitude of the people, <span class='add'>even</span> many of Ephraim, and Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the passover otherwise than it was written. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The good <span class='nd'>LORD</span> pardon every one 
<span class="verse" id="R230_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> prepareth his heart to seek God, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of his fathers, though <span class='add'>he be</span> not <span class='add'>cleansed</span> according to the purification of the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_20">20&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_21">21&#160;</span> And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness: and the Levites and the priests praised the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> day by day, <span class='add'>singing</span> with loud instruments unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R230_22">22&#160;</span> And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto all the Levites that taught the good knowledge of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and they did eat throughout the feast seven days, offering peace offerings, and making confession to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="R230_23">23&#160;</span> And the whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days: and they kept <span class='add'>other</span> seven days with gladness. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_24">24&#160;</span> For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the congregation a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.
<span class="verse" id="R230_25">25&#160;</span> And all the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_26">26&#160;</span> So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel <span class='add'>there was</span> not the like in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came <span class='add'>up</span> to his holy dwelling place, <span class='add'>even</span> unto heaven.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R231_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_1">1&#160;</span> Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_2">2&#160;</span>¶ And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests and the Levites after their courses, every man according to his service, the priests and Levites for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He appointed</span> also the king’s portion of his substance for the burnt offerings, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as <span class='add'>it is</span> written in the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_4">4&#160;</span> Moreover he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_5">5&#160;</span>¶ And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the tithe of all <span class='add'>things</span> brought they in abundantly.
<span class="verse" id="R231_6">6&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>concerning</span> the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God, and laid <span class='add'>them</span> by heaps.
<span class="verse" id="R231_7">7&#160;</span> In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished <span class='add'>them</span> in the seventh month. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_8">8&#160;</span> And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and his people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_9">9&#160;</span> Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_10">10&#160;</span> And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him, and said, Since <span class='add'>the people</span> began to bring the offerings into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath blessed his people; and that which is left <span class='add'>is</span> this great store. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and they prepared <span class='add'>them</span>,
<span class="verse" id="R231_12">12&#160;</span> And brought in the offerings and the tithes and the dedicated <span class='add'>things</span> faithfully: over which Cononiah the Levite <span class='add'>was</span> ruler, and Shimei his brother <span class='add'>was</span> the next. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_13">13&#160;</span> And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, <span class='add'>were</span> overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.
<span class="verse" id="R231_14">14&#160;</span> And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east, <span class='add'>was</span> over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the most holy things. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_15">15&#160;</span>And next him <span class='add'>were</span> Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in <span class='add'>their</span> set office, to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as to the small:
<span class="verse" id="R231_16">16&#160;</span> Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, <span class='add'>even</span> unto every one that entereth into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, his daily portion for their service in their charges according to their courses; 
<span class="verse" id="R231_17">17&#160;</span> Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by their courses; 
<span class="verse" id="R231_18">18&#160;</span> And to the genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness:
<span class="verse" id="R231_19">19&#160;</span> Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, <span class='add'>which were</span> in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every several city, the men that were expressed by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought <span class='add'>that which was</span> good and right and truth before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_21">21&#160;</span> And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did <span class='add'>it</span> with all his heart, and prospered.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R232_0'>32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_1">1&#160;</span> After these things, and the establishment thereof, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself.
<span class="verse" id="R232_2">2&#160;</span> And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem,
<span class="verse" id="R232_3">3&#160;</span> He took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which <span class='add'>were</span> without the city: and they did help him. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_4">4&#160;</span> So there was gathered much people together, who stopped all the fountains, and the brook that ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?
<span class="verse" id="R232_5">5&#160;</span> Also he strengthened himself, and built up all the wall that was broken, and raised <span class='add'>it</span> up to the towers, and another wall without, and repaired Millo <span class='add'>in</span> the city of David, and made darts and shields in abundance.
<span class="verse" id="R232_6">6&#160;</span> And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the street of the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying,
<span class="verse" id="R232_7">7&#160;</span> Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude that <span class='add'>is</span> with him: for <span class='add'>there be</span> more with us than with him: 
<span class="verse" id="R232_8">8&#160;</span>With him <span class='add'>is</span> an arm of flesh; but with us <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_9">9&#160;</span>¶ After this did Sennacherib king of Assyria send his servants to Jerusalem, (but he <span class='add'>himself laid siege</span> against Lachish, and all his power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto all Judah that <span class='add'>were</span> at Jerusalem, saying,
<span class="verse" id="R232_10">10&#160;</span> Thus saith Sennacherib king of Assyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem?
<span class="verse" id="R232_11">11&#160;</span> Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> our God shall deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_12">12&#160;</span> Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_13">13&#160;</span> Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto all the people of <span class='add'>other</span> lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_14">14&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>was there</span> among all the gods of those nations that my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_15">15&#160;</span> Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this manner, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of mine hand? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_16">16&#160;</span> And his servants spake yet <span class='add'>more</span> against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God, and against his servant Hezekiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_17">17&#160;</span> He wrote also letters to rail on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of <span class='add'>other</span> lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shall not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_18">18&#160;</span> Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ speech unto the people of Jerusalem that <span class='add'>were</span> on the wall, to affright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_19">19&#160;</span> And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the earth, <span class='add'>which were</span> the work of the hands of man. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_20">20&#160;</span>And for this <span class='add'>cause</span> Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_21">21&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent an angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the sword.
<span class="verse" id="R232_22">22&#160;</span> Thus the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all <span class='add'>other</span>, and guided them on every side. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_23">23&#160;</span> And many brought gifts unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_24">24&#160;</span>¶ In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign.
<span class="verse" id="R232_25">25&#160;</span> But Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit <span class='add'>done</span> unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_26">26&#160;</span> Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, <span class='add'>both</span> he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_27">27&#160;</span>¶ And Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and honour: and he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of pleasant jewels;
<span class="verse" id="R232_28">28&#160;</span> Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and stalls for all manner of beasts, and cotes for flocks. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_29">29&#160;</span> Moreover he provided him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance: for God had given him substance very much. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_30">30&#160;</span> This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Howbeit in <span class='add'>the business of</span> the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was <span class='add'>done</span> in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all <span class='add'>that was</span> in his heart.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_32">32&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his goodness, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, <span class='add'>and</span> in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
<span class="verse" id="R232_33">33&#160;</span> And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R233_0'>33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_1">1&#160;</span> Manasseh <span class='add'>was</span> twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem: 
<span class="verse" id="R233_2">2&#160;</span> But did <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, like unto the abominations of the heathen, whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had cast out before the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_3">3&#160;</span>¶ For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down, and he reared up altars for Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the host of heaven, and served them.
<span class="verse" id="R233_4">4&#160;</span> Also he built altars in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, whereof the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had said, In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_5">5&#160;</span> And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_6">6&#160;</span> And he caused his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom: also he observed times, and used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to provoke him to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_7">7&#160;</span> And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for ever: 
<span class="verse" id="R233_8">8&#160;</span> Neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from out of the land which I have appointed for your fathers; so that they will take heed to do all that I have commanded them, according to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_9">9&#160;</span> So Manasseh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, <span class='add'>and</span> to do worse than the heathen, whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had destroyed before the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_10">10&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake to Manasseh, and to his people: but they would not hearken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Wherefore the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="R233_12">12&#160;</span> And when he was in affliction, he besought the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, 
<span class="verse" id="R233_13">13&#160;</span> And prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> he <span class='add'>was</span> God. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_14">14&#160;</span> Now after this he built a wall without the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entering in at the fish gate, and compassed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height, and put captains of war in all the fenced cities of Judah.
<span class="verse" id="R233_15">15&#160;</span> And he took away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and in Jerusalem, and cast <span class='add'>them</span> out of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_16">16&#160;</span> And he repaired the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and sacrificed thereon peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_17">17&#160;</span> Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places, <span class='add'>yet</span> unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God only. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_18">18&#160;</span>¶ Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his God, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, behold, they <span class='add'>are written</span> in the book of the kings of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_19">19&#160;</span> His prayer also, and <span class='add'>how God</span> was intreated of him, and all his sin, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written among the sayings of the seers.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_20">20&#160;</span>¶ So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Amon <span class='add'>was</span> two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_22">22&#160;</span> But he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as did Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them; 
<span class="verse" id="R233_23">23&#160;</span> And humbled not himself before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespassed more and more.
<span class="verse" id="R233_24">24&#160;</span> And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_25">25&#160;</span>¶ But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R234_0'>34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_1">1&#160;</span> Josiah <span class='add'>was</span> eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_2">2&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> right in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and walked in the ways of David his father, and declined <span class='add'>neither</span> to the right hand, nor to the left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_3">3&#160;</span>¶ For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_4">4&#160;</span> And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the images, that <span class='add'>were</span> on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust <span class='add'>of them</span>, and strowed <span class='add'>it</span> upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them.
<span class="verse" id="R234_5">5&#160;</span> And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_6">6&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>so did he</span> in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about.
<span class="verse" id="R234_7">7&#160;</span> And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_9">9&#160;</span> And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they returned to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_10">10&#160;</span> And they put <span class='add'>it</span> in the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and they gave it to the workmen that wrought in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to repair and amend the house: 
<span class="verse" id="R234_11">11&#160;</span> Even to the artificers and builders gave they <span class='add'>it</span>, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="R234_12">12&#160;</span> And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them <span class='add'>were</span> Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set <span class='add'>it</span> forward; and <span class='add'>other of</span> the Levites, all that could skill of instruments of musick. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_13">13&#160;</span>Also <span class='add'>they were</span> over the bearers of burdens, and <span class='add'>were</span> overseers of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the Levites <span class='add'>there were</span> scribes, and officers, and porters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_14">14&#160;</span>¶ And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>given</span> by Moses.
<span class="verse" id="R234_15">15&#160;</span> And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_16">16&#160;</span> And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king word back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R234_17">17&#160;</span> And they have gathered together the money that was found in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers, and to the hand of the workmen.
<span class="verse" id="R234_18">18&#160;</span> Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.
<span class="verse" id="R234_19">19&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_20">20&#160;</span> And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king’s, saying,
<span class="verse" id="R234_21">21&#160;</span> Go, enquire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found: for great <span class='add'>is</span> the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to do after all that is written in this book. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_22">22&#160;</span> And Hilkiah, and <span class='add'>they</span> that the king <span class='add'>had appointed</span>, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college:) and they spake to her to that <span class='add'>effect</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_23">23&#160;</span>¶ And she answered them, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel, Tell ye the man that sent you to me, 
<span class="verse" id="R234_24">24&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, <span class='add'>even</span> all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah: 
<span class="verse" id="R234_25">25&#160;</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_26">26&#160;</span> And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel <span class='add'>concerning</span> the words which thou hast heard; 
<span class="verse" id="R234_27">27&#160;</span> Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes, and weep before me; I have even heard <span class='add'>thee</span> also, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_28">28&#160;</span> Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. So they brought the king word again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_29">29&#160;</span>¶ Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_30">30&#160;</span> And the king went up into the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and all the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="R234_31">31&#160;</span> And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, to walk after the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this book. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_32">32&#160;</span> And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand <span class='add'>to it</span>. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
<span class="verse" id="R234_33">33&#160;</span> And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that <span class='add'>pertained</span> to the children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, <span class='add'>even</span> to serve the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> their God. <span class='add'>And</span> all his days they departed not from following the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of their fathers.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R235_0'>35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_1">1&#160;</span> Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> in Jerusalem: and they killed the passover on the fourteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the first month. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_2">2&#160;</span> And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the service of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="R235_3">3&#160;</span> And said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build; <span class='add'>it shall</span> not <span class='add'>be</span> a burden upon <span class='add'>your</span> shoulders: serve now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> your God, and his people Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="R235_4">4&#160;</span> And prepare <span class='add'>yourselves</span> by the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_5">5&#160;</span> And stand in the holy <span class='add'>place</span> according to the divisions of the families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and <span class='add'>after</span> the division of the families of the Levites.
<span class="verse" id="R235_6">6&#160;</span> So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your brethren, that <span class='add'>they</span> may do according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the hand of Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_7">7&#160;</span> And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these <span class='add'>were</span> of the king’s substance.
<span class="verse" id="R235_8">8&#160;</span> And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two thousand and six hundred <span class='add'>small cattle</span>, and three hundred oxen.
<span class="verse" id="R235_9">9&#160;</span> Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for passover offerings five thousand <span class='add'>small cattle</span>, and five hundred oxen.
<span class="verse" id="R235_10">10&#160;</span> So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites in their courses, according to the king’s commandment. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_11">11&#160;</span> And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled <span class='add'>the blood</span> from their hands, and the Levites flayed <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_12">12&#160;</span> And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as <span class='add'>it is</span> written in the book of Moses. And so <span class='add'>did they</span> with the oxen. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_13">13&#160;</span> And they roasted the passover with fire according to the ordinance: but the <span class='add'>other</span> holy <span class='add'>offerings</span> sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided <span class='add'>them</span> speedily among all the people.
<span class="verse" id="R235_14">14&#160;</span> And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron <span class='add'>were busied</span> in offering of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_15">15&#160;</span> And the singers the sons of Asaph <span class='add'>were</span> in their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the porters <span class='add'>waited</span> at every gate; they might not depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for them.
<span class="verse" id="R235_16">16&#160;</span> So all the service of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> was prepared the same day, to keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to the commandment of king Josiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_17">17&#160;</span> And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.
<span class="verse" id="R235_18">18&#160;</span> And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
<span class="verse" id="R235_19">19&#160;</span> In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover kept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_20">20&#160;</span>¶ After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Carchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.
<span class="verse" id="R235_21">21&#160;</span> But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? <span class='add'>I come</span> not against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make haste: forbear thee from <span class='add'>meddling with</span> God, who <span class='add'>is</span> with me, that he destroy thee not.
<span class="verse" id="R235_22">22&#160;</span> Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_23">23&#160;</span> And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded.
<span class="verse" id="R235_24">24&#160;</span> His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in <span class='add'>one of</span> the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_25">25&#160;</span>¶ And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the lamentations. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_26">26&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according to <span class='add'>that which was</span> written in the law of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>,
<span class="verse" id="R235_27">27&#160;</span> And his deeds, first and last, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R236_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_1">1&#160;</span> Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father’s stead in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_2">2&#160;</span> Jehoahaz <span class='add'>was</span> twenty and three years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_3">3&#160;</span> And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
<span class="verse" id="R236_4">4&#160;</span> And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took Jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Jehoiakim <span class='add'>was</span> twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_6">6&#160;</span> Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.
<span class="verse" id="R236_7">7&#160;</span> Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_8">8&#160;</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they <span class='add'>are</span> written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Jehoiachin <span class='add'>was</span> eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_10">10&#160;</span> And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Zedekiah <span class='add'>was</span> one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_12">12&#160;</span> And he did <span class='add'>that which was</span> evil in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God, <span class='add'>and</span> humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet <span class='add'>speaking</span> from the mouth of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_13">13&#160;</span> And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people, transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and polluted the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_15">15&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place:
<span class="verse" id="R236_16">16&#160;</span> But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> arose against his people, till <span class='add'>there was</span> no remedy.
<span class="verse" id="R236_17">17&#160;</span> Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age: he gave <span class='add'>them</span> all into his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_18">18&#160;</span> And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes; all <span class='add'>these</span> he brought to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_19">19&#160;</span> And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_20">20&#160;</span> And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia:
<span class="verse" id="R236_21">21&#160;</span> To fulfil the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: <span class='add'>for</span> as long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_22">22&#160;</span>¶ Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>spoken</span> by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and <span class='add'>put it</span> also in writing, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R236_23">23&#160;</span> Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth hath the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which <span class='add'>is</span> in Judah. Who <span class='add'>is there</span> among you of all his people? The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God <span class='add'>be</span> with him, and let him go up. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
