<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Proverbs 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Proverbs</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR31_0'>31</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='PR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Proverbs  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="PR1_1">1&#160;</span> The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_2">2&#160;</span> To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding; 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_3">3&#160;</span> To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and equity;
<span class="verse" id="PR1_4">4&#160;</span> To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_5">5&#160;</span> A wise <span class='add'>man</span> will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_6">6&#160;</span> To understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_7">7&#160;</span>¶ The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the beginning of knowledge: <span class='add'>but</span> fools despise wisdom and instruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_8">8&#160;</span> My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_9">9&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>shall be</span> an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_11">11&#160;</span> If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_12">12&#160;</span> Let us swallow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_13">13&#160;</span> We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_14">14&#160;</span> Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have one purse: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_15">15&#160;</span> My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their path: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_16">16&#160;</span> For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood. 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_17">17&#160;</span> Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_18">18&#160;</span> And they lay wait for their <span class='add'>own</span> blood; they lurk privily for their <span class='add'>own</span> lives. 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_19">19&#160;</span>So <span class='add'>are</span> the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; <span class='add'>which</span> taketh away the life of the owners thereof. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets:
<span class="verse" id="PR1_21">21&#160;</span> She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, <span class='add'>saying</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_22">22&#160;</span> How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge? 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_23">23&#160;</span> Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_25">25&#160;</span> But ye have set at nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_26">26&#160;</span> I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh; 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_27">27&#160;</span> When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and anguish cometh upon you. 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_28">28&#160;</span> Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_29">29&#160;</span> For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_30">30&#160;</span> They would none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof. 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_31">31&#160;</span> Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices. 
<span class="verse" id="PR1_32">32&#160;</span> For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
<span class="verse" id="PR1_33">33&#160;</span> But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from fear of evil.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_1">1&#160;</span> My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_2">2&#160;</span> So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, <span class='add'>and</span> apply thine heart to understanding; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_3">3&#160;</span> Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, <span class='add'>and</span> liftest up thy voice for understanding;
<span class="verse" id="PR2_4">4&#160;</span> If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as <span class='add'>for</span> hid treasures; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_5">5&#160;</span> Then shalt thou understand the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and find the knowledge of God. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_6">6&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> giveth wisdom: out of his mouth <span class='add'>cometh</span> knowledge and understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_7">7&#160;</span> He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: <span class='add'>he is</span> a buckler to them that walk uprightly. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_8">8&#160;</span> He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_9">9&#160;</span> Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity; <span class='add'>yea</span>, every good path. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_11">11&#160;</span> Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee: 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_12">12&#160;</span> To deliver thee from the way of the evil <span class='add'>man</span>, from the man that speaketh froward things; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_13">13&#160;</span> Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_14">14&#160;</span> Who rejoice to do evil, <span class='add'>and</span> delight in the frowardness of the wicked; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_15">15&#160;</span> Whose ways <span class='add'>are</span> crooked, and <span class='add'>they</span> froward in their paths: 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_16">16&#160;</span> To deliver thee from the strange woman, <span class='add'>even</span> from the stranger <span class='add'>which</span> flattereth with her words; 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_17">17&#160;</span> Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the covenant of her God. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_18">18&#160;</span> For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_19">19&#160;</span> None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_20">20&#160;</span> That thou mayest walk in the way of good <span class='add'>men</span>, and keep the paths of the righteous. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_21">21&#160;</span> For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it. 
<span class="verse" id="PR2_22">22&#160;</span> But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_1">1&#160;</span> My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my commandments: 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_2">2&#160;</span> For length of days, and long life, and peace, shall they add to thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_3">3&#160;</span> Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thine heart: 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_4">4&#160;</span> So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_6">6&#160;</span> In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and depart from evil. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_8">8&#160;</span> It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_9">9&#160;</span> Honour the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of all thine increase: 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_10">10&#160;</span> So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_11">11&#160;</span>¶ My son, despise not the chastening of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; neither be weary of his correction: 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_12">12&#160;</span> For whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> loveth he correcteth; even as a father the son <span class='add'>in whom</span> he delighteth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Happy <span class='add'>is</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> findeth wisdom, and the man <span class='add'>that</span> getteth understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_14">14&#160;</span> For the merchandise of it <span class='add'>is</span> better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_15">15&#160;</span>She <span class='add'>is</span> more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_16">16&#160;</span> Length of days <span class='add'>is</span> in her right hand; <span class='add'>and</span> in her left hand riches and honour. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_17">17&#160;</span> Her ways <span class='add'>are</span> ways of pleasantness, and all her paths <span class='add'>are</span> peace. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_18">18&#160;</span>She <span class='add'>is</span> a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy <span class='add'>is every one</span> that retaineth her. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_19">19&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_20">20&#160;</span> By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_21">21&#160;</span>¶ My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom and discretion: 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_22">22&#160;</span> So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_23">23&#160;</span> Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_24">24&#160;</span> When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_25">25&#160;</span> Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_26">26&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_27">27&#160;</span>¶ Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do <span class='add'>it</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_28">28&#160;</span> Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_29">29&#160;</span> Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_30">30&#160;</span>¶ Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_31">31&#160;</span>¶ Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.
<span class="verse" id="PR3_32">32&#160;</span> For the froward <span class='add'>is</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but his secret <span class='add'>is</span> with the righteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_33">33&#160;</span>¶ The curse of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the just. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_34">34&#160;</span> Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly. 
<span class="verse" id="PR3_35">35&#160;</span> The wise shall inherit glory: but shame shall be the promotion of fools.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_1">1&#160;</span> Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_2">2&#160;</span> For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_3">3&#160;</span> For I was my father’s son, tender and only <span class='add'>beloved</span> in the sight of my mother. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_4">4&#160;</span> He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandments, and live. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_5">5&#160;</span> Get wisdom, get understanding: forget <span class='add'>it</span> not; neither decline from the words of my mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_6">6&#160;</span> Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she shall keep thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_7">7&#160;</span> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> the principal thing; <span class='add'>therefore</span> get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_8">8&#160;</span> Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_9">9&#160;</span> She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_10">10&#160;</span> Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life shall be many. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_11">11&#160;</span> I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right paths. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_12">12&#160;</span> When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_13">13&#160;</span> Take fast hold of instruction; let <span class='add'>her</span> not go: keep her; for she <span class='add'>is</span> thy life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil <span class='add'>men</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_15">15&#160;</span> Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_16">16&#160;</span> For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause <span class='add'>some</span> to fall. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_17">17&#160;</span> For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_18">18&#160;</span> But the path of the just <span class='add'>is</span> as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_19">19&#160;</span> The way of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> as darkness: they know not at what they stumble. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_20">20&#160;</span>¶ My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_21">21&#160;</span> Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thine heart. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_22">22&#160;</span>For they <span class='add'>are</span> life unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_23">23&#160;</span>¶ Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it <span class='add'>are</span> the issues of life.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_24">24&#160;</span> Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_25">25&#160;</span> Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR4_26">26&#160;</span> Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.
<span class="verse" id="PR4_27">27&#160;</span> Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from evil.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_1">1&#160;</span> My son, attend unto my wisdom, <span class='add'>and</span> bow thine ear to my understanding: 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_2">2&#160;</span> That thou mayest regard discretion, and <span class='add'>that</span> thy lips may keep knowledge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_3">3&#160;</span>¶ For the lips of a strange woman drop <span class='add'>as</span> an honeycomb, and her mouth <span class='add'>is</span> smoother than oil:
<span class="verse" id="PR5_4">4&#160;</span> But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a twoedged sword. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_5">5&#160;</span> Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_6">6&#160;</span> Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, <span class='add'>that</span> thou canst not know <span class='add'>them</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_7">7&#160;</span> Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words of my mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_8">8&#160;</span> Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house: 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_9">9&#160;</span> Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel: 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_10">10&#160;</span> Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth; and thy labours <span class='add'>be</span> in the house of a stranger;
<span class="verse" id="PR5_11">11&#160;</span> And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_12">12&#160;</span> And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof; 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_13">13&#160;</span> And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_14">14&#160;</span> I was almost in all evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_16">16&#160;</span> Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, <span class='add'>and</span> rivers of waters in the streets. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_17">17&#160;</span> Let them be only thine own, and not strangers’ with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_18">18&#160;</span> Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Let her be as</span> the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts satisfy thee at all times; and be thou ravished always with her love.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_20">20&#160;</span> And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? 
<span class="verse" id="PR5_21">21&#160;</span> For the ways of man <span class='add'>are</span> before the eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he pondereth all his goings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_22">22&#160;</span>¶ His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sins.
<span class="verse" id="PR5_23">23&#160;</span> He shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_1">1&#160;</span> My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, <span class='add'>if</span> thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger, 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_2">2&#160;</span> Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_3">3&#160;</span> Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when thou art come into the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and make sure thy friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_4">4&#160;</span> Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_5">5&#160;</span> Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand <span class='add'>of the hunter</span>, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_6">6&#160;</span>¶ Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise: 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_7">7&#160;</span> Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_8">8&#160;</span> Provideth her meat in the summer, <span class='add'>and</span> gathereth her food in the harvest. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_9">9&#160;</span> How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of thy sleep? 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep: 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_11">11&#160;</span> So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_12">12&#160;</span>¶ A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_13">13&#160;</span> He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers; 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_14">14&#160;</span> Frowardness <span class='add'>is</span> in his heart, he deviseth mischief continually; he soweth discord.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_16">16&#160;</span>¶ These six <span class='add'>things</span> doth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hate: yea, seven <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination unto him:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_17">17&#160;</span> A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
<span class="verse" id="PR6_18">18&#160;</span> An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_19">19&#160;</span> A false witness <span class='add'>that</span> speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_20">20&#160;</span>¶ My son, keep thy father’s commandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother: 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_21">21&#160;</span> Bind them continually upon thine heart, <span class='add'>and</span> tie them about thy neck. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_22">22&#160;</span> When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and <span class='add'>when</span> thou awakest, it shall talk with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_23">23&#160;</span> For the commandment <span class='add'>is</span> a lamp; and the law <span class='add'>is</span> light; and reproofs of instruction <span class='add'>are</span> the way of life:
<span class="verse" id="PR6_24">24&#160;</span> To keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_25">25&#160;</span> Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_26">26&#160;</span> For by means of a whorish woman <span class='add'>a man is brought</span> to a piece of bread: and the adulteress will hunt for the precious life.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_27">27&#160;</span> Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_28">28&#160;</span> Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned? 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_29">29&#160;</span> So he that goeth in to his neighbour’s wife; whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Men</span> do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_31">31&#160;</span>But <span class='add'>if</span> he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>But</span> whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he <span class='add'>that</span> doeth it destroyeth his own soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR6_33">33&#160;</span> A wound and dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be wiped away. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_34">34&#160;</span> For jealousy <span class='add'>is</span> the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. 
<span class="verse" id="PR6_35">35&#160;</span> He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content, though thou givest many gifts.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_1">1&#160;</span> My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_2">2&#160;</span> Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine eye. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_3">3&#160;</span> Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_4">4&#160;</span> Say unto wisdom, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> my sister; and call understanding <span class='add'>thy</span> kinswoman: 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_5">5&#160;</span> That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger <span class='add'>which</span> flattereth with her words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_6">6&#160;</span>¶ For at the window of my house I looked through my casement, 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_7">7&#160;</span> And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding,
<span class="verse" id="PR7_8">8&#160;</span> Passing through the street near her corner; and he went the way to her house, 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_9">9&#160;</span> In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night:
<span class="verse" id="PR7_10">10&#160;</span> And, behold, there met him a woman <span class='add'>with</span> the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_11">11&#160;</span>(She <span class='add'>is</span> loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house: 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_12">12&#160;</span> Now <span class='add'>is she</span> without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every corner.) 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_13">13&#160;</span> So she caught him, and kissed him, <span class='add'>and</span> with an impudent face said unto him,
<span class="verse" id="PR7_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>I have</span> peace offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_15">15&#160;</span> Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_16">16&#160;</span> I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved <span class='add'>works</span>, with fine linen of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_17">17&#160;</span> I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_18">18&#160;</span> Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_19">19&#160;</span> For the goodman <span class='add'>is</span> not at home, he is gone a long journey: 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_20">20&#160;</span> He hath taken a bag of money with him, <span class='add'>and</span> will come home at the day appointed.
<span class="verse" id="PR7_21">21&#160;</span> With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_22">22&#160;</span> He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks;
<span class="verse" id="PR7_23">23&#160;</span> Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it <span class='add'>is</span> for his life. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_24">24&#160;</span>¶ Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of my mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_25">25&#160;</span> Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_26">26&#160;</span> For she hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong <span class='add'>men</span> have been slain by her. 
<span class="verse" id="PR7_27">27&#160;</span> Her house <span class='add'>is</span> the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_1">1&#160;</span> Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_2">2&#160;</span> She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_3">3&#160;</span> She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_4">4&#160;</span> Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice <span class='add'>is</span> to the sons of man. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_5">5&#160;</span> O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an understanding heart. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_6">6&#160;</span> Hear; for I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my lips <span class='add'>shall be</span> right things. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_7">7&#160;</span> For my mouth shall speak truth; and wickedness <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to my lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_8">8&#160;</span> All the words of my mouth <span class='add'>are</span> in righteousness; <span class='add'>there is</span> nothing froward or perverse in them.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_9">9&#160;</span>They <span class='add'>are</span> all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_10">10&#160;</span> Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_11">11&#160;</span> For wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> better than rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_12">12&#160;</span> I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty inventions.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_13">13&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_14">14&#160;</span> Counsel <span class='add'>is</span> mine, and sound wisdom: I <span class='add'>am</span> understanding; I have strength. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_15">15&#160;</span> By me kings reign, and princes decree justice. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_16">16&#160;</span> By me princes rule, and nobles, <span class='add'>even</span> all the judges of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_17">17&#160;</span> I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_18">18&#160;</span> Riches and honour <span class='add'>are</span> with me; <span class='add'>yea</span>, durable riches and righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_19">19&#160;</span> My fruit <span class='add'>is</span> better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_20">20&#160;</span> I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_21">21&#160;</span> That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_22">22&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_23">23&#160;</span> I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_24">24&#160;</span>When <span class='add'>there were</span> no depths, I was brought forth; when <span class='add'>there were</span> no fountains abounding with water. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_25">25&#160;</span> Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought forth: 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_26">26&#160;</span> While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_27">27&#160;</span> When he prepared the heavens, I <span class='add'>was</span> there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth:
<span class="verse" id="PR8_28">28&#160;</span> When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep: 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_29">29&#160;</span> When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the earth: 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_30">30&#160;</span> Then I was by him, <span class='add'>as</span> one brought up <span class='add'>with him:</span> and I was daily <span class='add'>his</span> delight, rejoicing always before him; 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_31">31&#160;</span> Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights <span class='add'>were</span> with the sons of men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_32">32&#160;</span> Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for blessed <span class='add'>are they that</span> keep my ways. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_33">33&#160;</span> Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_34">34&#160;</span> Blessed <span class='add'>is</span> the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. 
<span class="verse" id="PR8_35">35&#160;</span> For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR8_36">36&#160;</span> But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_1">1&#160;</span> Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars: 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_2">2&#160;</span> She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_3">3&#160;</span> She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city, 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_4">4&#160;</span>Whoso <span class='add'>is</span> simple, let him turn in hither: <span class='add'>as for</span> him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_5">5&#160;</span> Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine <span class='add'>which</span> I have mingled. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_6">6&#160;</span> Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_7">7&#160;</span> He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked <span class='add'>man getteth</span> himself a blot. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_8">8&#160;</span> Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_9">9&#160;</span> Give <span class='add'>instruction</span> to a wise <span class='add'>man</span>, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just <span class='add'>man</span>, and he will increase in learning. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_10">10&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the beginning of wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy <span class='add'>is</span> understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_11">11&#160;</span> For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_12">12&#160;</span> If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but <span class='add'>if</span> thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear <span class='add'>it</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_13">13&#160;</span>¶ A foolish woman <span class='add'>is</span> clamorous: <span class='add'>she is</span> simple, and knoweth nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_14">14&#160;</span> For she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city, 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_15">15&#160;</span> To call passengers who go right on their ways: 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_16">16&#160;</span>Whoso <span class='add'>is</span> simple, let him turn in hither: and <span class='add'>as for</span> him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
<span class="verse" id="PR9_17">17&#160;</span> Stolen waters are sweet, and bread <span class='add'>eaten</span> in secret is pleasant.
<span class="verse" id="PR9_18">18&#160;</span> But he knoweth not that the dead <span class='add'>are</span> there; <span class='add'>and that</span> her guests <span class='add'>are</span> in the depths of hell.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_1">1&#160;</span> The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish son <span class='add'>is</span> the heaviness of his mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_2">2&#160;</span> Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness delivereth from death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the wicked.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_4">4&#160;</span> He becometh poor that dealeth <span class='add'>with</span> a slack hand: but the hand of the diligent maketh rich. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_5">5&#160;</span> He that gathereth in summer <span class='add'>is</span> a wise son: <span class='add'>but</span> he that sleepeth in harvest <span class='add'>is</span> a son that causeth shame. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_6">6&#160;</span> Blessings <span class='add'>are</span> upon the head of the just: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_7">7&#160;</span> The memory of the just <span class='add'>is</span> blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_8">8&#160;</span> The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool shall fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_9">9&#160;</span> He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he that perverteth his ways shall be known. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_10">10&#160;</span> He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool shall fall.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_11">11&#160;</span> The mouth of a righteous <span class='add'>man is</span> a well of life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_12">12&#160;</span> Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_13">13&#160;</span> In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a rod <span class='add'>is</span> for the back of him that is void of understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_14">14&#160;</span> Wise <span class='add'>men</span> lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish <span class='add'>is</span> near destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_15">15&#160;</span> The rich man’s wealth <span class='add'>is</span> his strong city: the destruction of the poor <span class='add'>is</span> their poverty. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_16">16&#160;</span> The labour of the righteous <span class='add'>tendeth</span> to life: the fruit of the wicked to sin. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_17">17&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>is in</span> the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that refuseth reproof erreth.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_18">18&#160;</span> He that hideth hatred <span class='add'>with</span> lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander, <span class='add'>is</span> a fool. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_19">19&#160;</span> In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his lips <span class='add'>is</span> wise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_20">20&#160;</span> The tongue of the just <span class='add'>is as</span> choice silver: the heart of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> little worth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_21">21&#160;</span> The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want of wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_22">22&#160;</span> The blessing of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, it maketh rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> as sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of understanding hath wisdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_24">24&#160;</span> The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire of the righteous shall be granted. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_25">25&#160;</span> As the whirlwind passeth, so <span class='add'>is</span> the wicked no <span class='add'>more:</span> but the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> an everlasting foundation. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_26">26&#160;</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so <span class='add'>is</span> the sluggard to them that send him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_27">27&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
<span class="verse" id="PR10_28">28&#160;</span> The hope of the righteous <span class='add'>shall be</span> gladness: but the expectation of the wicked shall perish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_29">29&#160;</span> The way of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> strength to the upright: but destruction <span class='add'>shall be</span> to the workers of iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_30">30&#160;</span> The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not inhabit the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_31">31&#160;</span> The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward tongue shall be cut out. 
<span class="verse" id="PR10_32">32&#160;</span> The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth of the wicked <span class='add'>speaketh</span> frowardness.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_1">1&#160;</span> A false balance <span class='add'>is</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but a just weight <span class='add'>is</span> his delight.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>When</span> pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_3">3&#160;</span> The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_4">4&#160;</span> Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness delivereth from death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_5">5&#160;</span> The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_6">6&#160;</span> The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but transgressors shall be taken in <span class='add'>their own</span> naughtiness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_7">7&#160;</span> When a wicked man dieth, <span class='add'>his</span> expectation shall perish: and the hope of unjust <span class='add'>men</span> perisheth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_8">8&#160;</span> The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_9">9&#160;</span> An hypocrite with <span class='add'>his</span> mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through knowledge shall the just be delivered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_10">10&#160;</span> When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when the wicked perish, <span class='add'>there is</span> shouting. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_11">11&#160;</span> By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_12">12&#160;</span> He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_13">13&#160;</span> A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_14">14&#160;</span> Where no counsel <span class='add'>is</span>, the people fall: but in the multitude of counsellors <span class='add'>there is</span> safety. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_15">15&#160;</span> He that is surety for a stranger shall smart <span class='add'>for it:</span> and he that hateth suretiship is sure.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_16">16&#160;</span> A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong <span class='add'>men</span> retain riches. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_17">17&#160;</span> The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> cruel troubleth his own flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_18">18&#160;</span> The wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that soweth righteousness <span class='add'>shall be</span> a sure reward. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_19">19&#160;</span> As righteousness <span class='add'>tendeth</span> to life: so he that pursueth evil <span class='add'>pursueth it</span> to his own death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_20">20&#160;</span> They that are of a froward heart <span class='add'>are</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <span class='add'>such as are</span> upright in <span class='add'>their</span> way <span class='add'>are</span> his delight. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Though</span> hand <span class='add'>join</span> in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> a jewel of gold in a swine’s snout, <span class='add'>so is</span> a fair woman which is without discretion.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_23">23&#160;</span> The desire of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> only good: <span class='add'>but</span> the expectation of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_24">24&#160;</span> There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and <span class='add'>there is</span> that withholdeth more than is meet, but <span class='add'>it tendeth</span> to poverty. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_25">25&#160;</span> The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth shall be watered also himself.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_26">26&#160;</span> He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but blessing <span class='add'>shall be</span> upon the head of him that selleth <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_27">27&#160;</span> He that diligently seeketh good procureth favour: but he that seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_28">28&#160;</span> He that trusteth in his riches shall fall: but the righteous shall flourish as a branch. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_29">29&#160;</span> He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind: and the fool <span class='add'>shall be</span> servant to the wise of heart. 
<span class="verse" id="PR11_30">30&#160;</span> The fruit of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> a tree of life; and he that winneth souls <span class='add'>is</span> wise.
<span class="verse" id="PR11_31">31&#160;</span> Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more the wicked and the sinner.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_1">1&#160;</span> Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reproof <span class='add'>is</span> brutish. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_2">2&#160;</span> A good <span class='add'>man</span> obtaineth favour of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but a man of wicked devices will he condemn. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_3">3&#160;</span> A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the righteous shall not be moved. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_4">4&#160;</span> A virtuous woman <span class='add'>is</span> a crown to her husband: but she that maketh ashamed <span class='add'>is</span> as rottenness in his bones. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_5">5&#160;</span> The thoughts of the righteous <span class='add'>are</span> right: <span class='add'>but</span> the counsels of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> deceit. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_6">6&#160;</span> The words of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> to lie in wait for blood: but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_7">7&#160;</span> The wicked are overthrown, and <span class='add'>are</span> not: but the house of the righteous shall stand. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_8">8&#160;</span> A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but he that is of a perverse heart shall be despised.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> despised, and hath a servant, <span class='add'>is</span> better than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_10">10&#160;</span> A righteous <span class='add'>man</span> regardeth the life of his beast: but the tender mercies of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> cruel.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_11">11&#160;</span> He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread: but he that followeth vain <span class='add'>persons is</span> void of understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_12">12&#160;</span> The wicked desireth the net of evil <span class='add'>men:</span> but the root of the righteous yieldeth <span class='add'>fruit</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_13">13&#160;</span> The wicked is snared by the transgression of <span class='add'>his</span> lips: but the just shall come out of trouble.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_14">14&#160;</span> A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of <span class='add'>his</span> mouth: and the recompence of a man’s hands shall be rendered unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_15">15&#160;</span> The way of a fool <span class='add'>is</span> right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto counsel <span class='add'>is</span> wise. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_16">16&#160;</span> A fool’s wrath is presently known: but a prudent <span class='add'>man</span> covereth shame.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that</span> speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness: but a false witness deceit. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_18">18&#160;</span> There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> health. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_19">19&#160;</span> The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying tongue <span class='add'>is</span> but for a moment. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_20">20&#160;</span> Deceit <span class='add'>is</span> in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counsellors of peace <span class='add'>is</span> joy. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_21">21&#160;</span> There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked shall be filled with mischief. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_22">22&#160;</span> Lying lips <span class='add'>are</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but they that deal truly <span class='add'>are</span> his delight. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_23">23&#160;</span> A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools proclaimeth foolishness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_24">24&#160;</span> The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the slothful shall be under tribute.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_25">25&#160;</span> Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good word maketh it glad. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_26">26&#160;</span> The righteous <span class='add'>is</span> more excellent than his neighbour: but the way of the wicked seduceth them.
<span class="verse" id="PR12_27">27&#160;</span> The slothful <span class='add'>man</span> roasteth not that which he took in hunting: but the substance of a diligent man <span class='add'>is</span> precious. 
<span class="verse" id="PR12_28">28&#160;</span> In the way of righteousness <span class='add'>is</span> life; and <span class='add'>in</span> the pathway <span class='add'>thereof there is</span> no death.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_1">1&#160;</span> A wise son <span class='add'>heareth</span> his father’s instruction: but a scorner heareth not rebuke. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_2">2&#160;</span> A man shall eat good by the fruit of <span class='add'>his</span> mouth: but the soul of the transgressors <span class='add'>shall eat</span> violence. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_3">3&#160;</span> He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life: <span class='add'>but</span> he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_4">4&#160;</span> The soul of the sluggard desireth, and <span class='add'>hath</span> nothing: but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_5">5&#160;</span> A righteous <span class='add'>man</span> hateth lying: but a wicked <span class='add'>man</span> is loathsome, and cometh to shame. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_6">6&#160;</span> Righteousness keepeth <span class='add'>him that is</span> upright in the way: but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_7">7&#160;</span> There is that maketh himself rich, yet <span class='add'>hath</span> nothing: <span class='add'>there is</span> that maketh himself poor, yet <span class='add'>hath</span> great riches. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_8">8&#160;</span> The ransom of a man’s life <span class='add'>are</span> his riches: but the poor heareth not rebuke. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_9">9&#160;</span> The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_10">10&#160;</span> Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised <span class='add'>is</span> wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_11">11&#160;</span> Wealth <span class='add'>gotten</span> by vanity shall be diminished: but he that gathereth by labour shall increase.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_12">12&#160;</span> Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but <span class='add'>when</span> the desire cometh, <span class='add'>it is</span> a tree of life. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_13">13&#160;</span> Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_14">14&#160;</span> The law of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_15">15&#160;</span> Good understanding giveth favour: but the way of transgressors <span class='add'>is</span> hard. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_16">16&#160;</span> Every prudent <span class='add'>man</span> dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open <span class='add'>his</span> folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_17">17&#160;</span> A wicked messenger falleth into mischief: but a faithful ambassador <span class='add'>is</span> health.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_18">18&#160;</span> Poverty and shame <span class='add'>shall be to</span> him that refuseth instruction: but he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_19">19&#160;</span> The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but <span class='add'>it is</span> abomination to fools to depart from evil. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_20">20&#160;</span> He that walketh with wise <span class='add'>men</span> shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed.
<span class="verse" id="PR13_21">21&#160;</span> Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall be repayed. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_22">22&#160;</span> A good <span class='add'>man</span> leaveth an inheritance to his children’s children: and the wealth of the sinner <span class='add'>is</span> laid up for the just. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_23">23&#160;</span> Much food <span class='add'>is in</span> the tillage of the poor: but there is <span class='add'>that is</span> destroyed for want of judgment. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_24">24&#160;</span> He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes. 
<span class="verse" id="PR13_25">25&#160;</span> The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the belly of the wicked shall want.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_1">1&#160;</span> Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_2">2&#160;</span> He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse in his ways despiseth him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_3">3&#160;</span> In the mouth of the foolish <span class='add'>is</span> a rod of pride: but the lips of the wise shall preserve them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_4">4&#160;</span> Where no oxen <span class='add'>are</span>, the crib <span class='add'>is</span> clean: but much increase <span class='add'>is</span> by the strength of the ox. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_5">5&#160;</span> A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter lies. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_6">6&#160;</span> A scorner seeketh wisdom, and <span class='add'>findeth it</span> not: but knowledge <span class='add'>is</span> easy unto him that understandeth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_7">7&#160;</span> Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not <span class='add'>in him</span> the lips of knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_8">8&#160;</span> The wisdom of the prudent <span class='add'>is</span> to understand his way: but the folly of fools <span class='add'>is</span> deceit. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_9">9&#160;</span> Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous <span class='add'>there is</span> favour. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_10">10&#160;</span> The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_11">11&#160;</span> The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_12">12&#160;</span> There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof <span class='add'>are</span> the ways of death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_13">13&#160;</span> Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth <span class='add'>is</span> heaviness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_14">14&#160;</span> The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a good man <span class='add'>shall be satisfied</span> from himself. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_15">15&#160;</span> The simple believeth every word: but the prudent <span class='add'>man</span> looketh well to his going. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_16">16&#160;</span> A wise <span class='add'>man</span> feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool rageth, and is confident. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> soon angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked devices is hated. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_18">18&#160;</span> The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_19">19&#160;</span> The evil bow before the good; and the wicked at the gates of the righteous. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_20">20&#160;</span> The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but the rich <span class='add'>hath</span> many friends.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_21">21&#160;</span> He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: but he that hath mercy on the poor, happy <span class='add'>is</span> he. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_22">22&#160;</span> Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth <span class='add'>shall be</span> to them that devise good. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_23">23&#160;</span> In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips <span class='add'>tendeth</span> only to penury. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_24">24&#160;</span> The crown of the wise <span class='add'>is</span> their riches: <span class='add'>but</span> the foolishness of fools <span class='add'>is</span> folly. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_25">25&#160;</span> A true witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful <span class='add'>witness</span> speaketh lies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_26">26&#160;</span> In the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> strong confidence: and his children shall have a place of refuge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_27">27&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_28">28&#160;</span> In the multitude of people <span class='add'>is</span> the king’s honour: but in the want of people <span class='add'>is</span> the destruction of the prince. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> slow to wrath <span class='add'>is</span> of great understanding: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> hasty of spirit exalteth folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_30">30&#160;</span> A sound heart <span class='add'>is</span> the life of the flesh: but envy the rottenness of the bones. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_31">31&#160;</span> He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker: but he that honoureth him hath mercy on the poor. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_32">32&#160;</span> The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous hath hope in his death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_33">33&#160;</span> Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but <span class='add'>that which is</span> in the midst of fools is made known. 
<span class="verse" id="PR14_34">34&#160;</span> Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin <span class='add'>is</span> a reproach to any people.
<span class="verse" id="PR14_35">35&#160;</span> The king’s favour <span class='add'>is</span> toward a wise servant: but his wrath is <span class='add'>against</span> him that causeth shame.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_1">1&#160;</span> A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_2">2&#160;</span> The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools poureth out foolishness.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_3">3&#160;</span> The eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>are</span> in every place, beholding the evil and the good. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_4">4&#160;</span> A wholesome tongue <span class='add'>is</span> a tree of life: but perverseness therein <span class='add'>is</span> a breach in the spirit.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_5">5&#160;</span> A fool despiseth his father’s instruction: but he that regardeth reproof is prudent. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_6">6&#160;</span> In the house of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> much treasure: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_7">7&#160;</span> The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the foolish <span class='add'>doeth</span> not so. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_8">8&#160;</span> The sacrifice of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but the prayer of the upright <span class='add'>is</span> his delight. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_9">9&#160;</span> The way of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but he loveth him that followeth after righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_10">10&#160;</span> Correction <span class='add'>is</span> grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: <span class='add'>and</span> he that hateth reproof shall die.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_11">11&#160;</span> Hell and destruction <span class='add'>are</span> before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: how much more then the hearts of the children of men? 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_12">12&#160;</span> A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him: neither will he go unto the wise. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_13">13&#160;</span> A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_14">14&#160;</span> The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge: but the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_15">15&#160;</span> All the days of the afflicted <span class='add'>are</span> evil: but he that is of a merry heart <span class='add'>hath</span> a continual feast. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_16">16&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> little with the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> than great treasure and trouble therewith. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_17">17&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_18">18&#160;</span> A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> slow to anger appeaseth strife. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_19">19&#160;</span> The way of the slothful <span class='add'>man is</span> as an hedge of thorns: but the way of the righteous <span class='add'>is</span> made plain.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_20">20&#160;</span> A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his mother. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_21">21&#160;</span> Folly <span class='add'>is</span> joy to <span class='add'>him that is</span> destitute of wisdom: but a man of understanding walketh uprightly.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_22">22&#160;</span> Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of counsellors they are established. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_23">23&#160;</span> A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word <span class='add'>spoken</span> in due season, how good <span class='add'>is it</span>!
<span class="verse" id="PR15_24">24&#160;</span> The way of life <span class='add'>is</span> above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will destroy the house of the proud: but he will establish the border of the widow. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_26">26&#160;</span> The thoughts of the wicked <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: but <span class='add'>the words</span> of the pure <span class='add'>are</span> pleasant words.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_27">27&#160;</span> He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_28">28&#160;</span> The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_29">29&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of the righteous. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_30">30&#160;</span> The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: <span class='add'>and</span> a good report maketh the bones fat. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_31">31&#160;</span> The ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise. 
<span class="verse" id="PR15_32">32&#160;</span> He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reproof getteth understanding.
<span class="verse" id="PR15_33">33&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the instruction of wisdom; and before honour <span class='add'>is</span> humility.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_1">1&#160;</span> The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, <span class='add'>is</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_2">2&#160;</span> All the ways of a man <span class='add'>are</span> clean in his own eyes; but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> weigheth the spirits. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_3">3&#160;</span> Commit thy works unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and thy thoughts shall be established.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_4">4&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made all <span class='add'>things</span> for himself: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_5">5&#160;</span>Every one <span class='add'>that is</span> proud in heart <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: <span class='add'>though</span> hand <span class='add'>join</span> in hand, he shall not be unpunished.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_6">6&#160;</span> By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>men</span> depart from evil. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_7">7&#160;</span> When a man’s ways please the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_8">8&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> a little with righteousness than great revenues without right. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_9">9&#160;</span> A man’s heart deviseth his way: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> directeth his steps. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_10">10&#160;</span> A divine sentence <span class='add'>is</span> in the lips of the king: his mouth transgresseth not in judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_11">11&#160;</span> A just weight and balance <span class='add'>are</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span>: all the weights of the bag <span class='add'>are</span> his work.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for the throne is established by righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_13">13&#160;</span> Righteous lips <span class='add'>are</span> the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_14">14&#160;</span> The wrath of a king <span class='add'>is as</span> messengers of death: but a wise man will pacify it. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_15">15&#160;</span> In the light of the king’s countenance <span class='add'>is</span> life; and his favour <span class='add'>is</span> as a cloud of the latter rain. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_16">16&#160;</span> How much better <span class='add'>is it</span> to get wisdom than gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver! 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_17">17&#160;</span> The highway of the upright <span class='add'>is</span> to depart from evil: he that keepeth his way preserveth his soul. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_18">18&#160;</span> Pride <span class='add'>goeth</span> before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_19">19&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>it is to be</span> of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_20">20&#160;</span> He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: and whoso trusteth in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, happy <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_21">21&#160;</span> The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_22">22&#160;</span> Understanding <span class='add'>is</span> a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but the instruction of fools <span class='add'>is</span> folly. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_23">23&#160;</span> The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to his lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_24">24&#160;</span> Pleasant words <span class='add'>are as</span> an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_25">25&#160;</span> There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof <span class='add'>are</span> the ways of death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_26">26&#160;</span> He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth it of him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_27">27&#160;</span> An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips <span class='add'>there is</span> as a burning fire.
<span class="verse" id="PR16_28">28&#160;</span> A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief friends.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_29">29&#160;</span> A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way <span class='add'>that is</span> not good. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_30">30&#160;</span> He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips he bringeth evil to pass. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_31">31&#160;</span> The hoary head <span class='add'>is</span> a crown of glory, <span class='add'>if</span> it be found in the way of righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> slow to anger <span class='add'>is</span> better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city. 
<span class="verse" id="PR16_33">33&#160;</span> The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof <span class='add'>is</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_1">1&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of sacrifices <span class='add'>with</span> strife.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_2">2&#160;</span> A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_3">3&#160;</span> The fining pot <span class='add'>is</span> for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> trieth the hearts. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_4">4&#160;</span> A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; <span class='add'>and</span> a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_5">5&#160;</span> Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: <span class='add'>and</span> he that is glad at calamities shall not be unpunished.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_6">6&#160;</span> Children’s children <span class='add'>are</span> the crown of old men; and the glory of children <span class='add'>are</span> their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_7">7&#160;</span> Excellent speech becometh not a fool: much less do lying lips a prince.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_8">8&#160;</span> A gift <span class='add'>is as</span> a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_9">9&#160;</span> He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that repeateth a matter separateth  <span class='add'>very</span> friends.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_10">10&#160;</span> A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundred stripes into a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_11">11&#160;</span> An evil <span class='add'>man</span> seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_12">12&#160;</span> Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool in his folly. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_13">13&#160;</span> Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_14">14&#160;</span> The beginning of strife <span class='add'>is as</span> when one letteth out water: therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_15">15&#160;</span> He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both <span class='add'>are</span> abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_16">16&#160;</span>Wherefore <span class='add'>is there</span> a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing <span class='add'>he hath</span> no heart <span class='add'>to it</span>? 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_17">17&#160;</span> A friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_18">18&#160;</span> A man void of understanding striketh hands, <span class='add'>and</span> becometh surety in the presence of his friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_19">19&#160;</span> He loveth transgression that loveth strife: <span class='add'>and</span> he that exalteth his gate seeketh destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_20">20&#160;</span> He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a perverse tongue falleth into mischief.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_21">21&#160;</span> He that begetteth a fool <span class='add'>doeth it</span> to his sorrow: and the father of a fool hath no joy. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_22">22&#160;</span> A merry heart doeth good <span class='add'>like</span> a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_23">23&#160;</span> A wicked <span class='add'>man</span> taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of judgment. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_24">24&#160;</span> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool <span class='add'>are</span> in the ends of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_25">25&#160;</span> A foolish son <span class='add'>is</span> a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that bare him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR17_26">26&#160;</span> Also to punish the just <span class='add'>is</span> not good, <span class='add'>nor</span> to strike princes for equity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_27">27&#160;</span> He that hath knowledge spareth his words: <span class='add'>and</span> a man of understanding is of an excellent spirit.
<span class="verse" id="PR17_28">28&#160;</span> Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: <span class='add'>and</span> he that shutteth his lips <span class='add'>is esteemed</span> a man of understanding.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_1">1&#160;</span> Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh <span class='add'>and</span> intermeddleth with all wisdom.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_2">2&#160;</span> A fool hath no delight in understanding, but that his heart may discover itself. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_3">3&#160;</span> When the wicked cometh, <span class='add'>then</span> cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_4">4&#160;</span> The words of a man’s mouth <span class='add'>are as</span> deep waters, <span class='add'>and</span> the wellspring of wisdom <span class='add'>as</span> a flowing brook. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_6">6&#160;</span> A fool’s lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for strokes. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_7">7&#160;</span> A fool’s mouth <span class='add'>is</span> his destruction, and his lips <span class='add'>are</span> the snare of his soul. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_8">8&#160;</span> The words of a talebearer <span class='add'>are</span> as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_9">9&#160;</span> He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_10">10&#160;</span> The name of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_11">11&#160;</span> The rich man’s wealth <span class='add'>is</span> his strong city, and as an high wall in his own conceit. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_12">12&#160;</span> Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honour <span class='add'>is</span> humility. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_13">13&#160;</span> He that answereth a matter before he heareth <span class='add'>it</span>, it <span class='add'>is</span> folly and shame unto him.
<span class="verse" id="PR18_14">14&#160;</span> The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear? 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_15">15&#160;</span> The heart of the prudent getteth knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_16">16&#160;</span> A man’s gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great men. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='add'>He that is</span> first in his own cause <span class='add'>seemeth</span> just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_18">18&#160;</span> The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the mighty. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_19">19&#160;</span> A brother offended <span class='add'>is harder to be won</span> than a strong city: and <span class='add'>their</span> contentions  <span class='add'>are</span> like the bars of a castle. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_20">20&#160;</span> A man’s belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; <span class='add'>and</span> with the increase of his lips shall he be filled. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_21">21&#160;</span> Death and life <span class='add'>are</span> in the power of the tongue: and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Whoso</span> findeth a wife findeth a good <span class='add'>thing</span>, and obtaineth favour of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_23">23&#160;</span> The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly. 
<span class="verse" id="PR18_24">24&#160;</span> A man <span class='add'>that hath</span> friends must shew himself friendly: and there is a friend <span class='add'>that</span> sticketh closer than a brother.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_1">1&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> the poor that walketh in his integrity, than <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse in his lips, and is a fool. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_2">2&#160;</span>Also, <span class='add'>that</span> the soul <span class='add'>be</span> without knowledge, <span class='add'>it is</span> not good; and he that hasteth with <span class='add'>his</span> feet sinneth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_3">3&#160;</span> The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_4">4&#160;</span> Wealth maketh many friends; but the poor is separated from his neighbour. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_5">5&#160;</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished, and <span class='add'>he that</span> speaketh lies shall not escape.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_6">6&#160;</span> Many will intreat the favour of the prince: and every man <span class='add'>is</span> a friend to him that giveth gifts.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_7">7&#160;</span> All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his friends go far from him? he pursueth <span class='add'>them with</span> words, <span class='add'>yet</span> they <span class='add'>are</span> wanting <span class='add'>to him</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_8">8&#160;</span> He that getteth wisdom loveth his own soul: he that keepeth understanding shall find good.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_9">9&#160;</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished, and <span class='add'>he that</span> speaketh lies shall perish. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_10">10&#160;</span> Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less for a servant to have rule over princes. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_11">11&#160;</span> The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and <span class='add'>it is</span> his glory to pass over a transgression.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_12">12&#160;</span> The king’s wrath <span class='add'>is</span> as the roaring of a lion; but his favour <span class='add'>is</span> as dew upon the grass. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_13">13&#160;</span> A foolish son <span class='add'>is</span> the calamity of his father: and the contentions of a wife <span class='add'>are</span> a continual dropping. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_14">14&#160;</span> House and riches <span class='add'>are</span> the inheritance of fathers: and a prudent wife <span class='add'>is</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_15">15&#160;</span> Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall suffer hunger. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_16">16&#160;</span> He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; <span class='add'>but</span> he that despiseth his ways shall die. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_17">17&#160;</span> He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and that which he hath given will he pay him again.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_18">18&#160;</span> Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_19">19&#160;</span> A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver <span class='add'>him</span>, yet thou must do it again.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_20">20&#160;</span> Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There are</span> many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless the counsel of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, that shall stand. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_22">22&#160;</span> The desire of a man <span class='add'>is</span> his kindness: and a poor man <span class='add'>is</span> better than a liar. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_23">23&#160;</span> The fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>tendeth</span> to life: and <span class='add'>he that hath it</span> shall abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with evil. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_24">24&#160;</span> A slothful <span class='add'>man</span> hideth his hand in <span class='add'>his</span> bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_25">25&#160;</span> Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware: and reprove one that hath understanding, <span class='add'>and</span> he will understand knowledge.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_26">26&#160;</span> He that wasteth <span class='add'>his</span> father, <span class='add'>and</span> chaseth away <span class='add'>his</span> mother, <span class='add'>is</span> a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_27">27&#160;</span> Cease, my son, to hear the instruction <span class='add'>that causeth</span> to err from the words of knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR19_28">28&#160;</span> An ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.
<span class="verse" id="PR19_29">29&#160;</span> Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fools.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_1">1&#160;</span> Wine <span class='add'>is</span> a mocker, strong drink <span class='add'>is</span> raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_2">2&#160;</span> The fear of a king <span class='add'>is</span> as the roaring of a lion: <span class='add'>whoso</span> provoketh him to anger sinneth <span class='add'>against</span> his own soul. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool will be meddling. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_4">4&#160;</span> The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; <span class='add'>therefore</span> shall he beg in harvest, and <span class='add'>have</span> nothing.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_5">5&#160;</span> Counsel in the heart of man <span class='add'>is like</span> deep water; but a man of understanding will draw it out. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_6">6&#160;</span> Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can find?
<span class="verse" id="PR20_7">7&#160;</span> The just <span class='add'>man</span> walketh in his integrity: his children <span class='add'>are</span> blessed after him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_8">8&#160;</span> A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all evil with his eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_9">9&#160;</span> Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_10">10&#160;</span> Divers weights, <span class='add'>and</span> divers measures, both of them <span class='add'>are</span> alike abomination to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_11">11&#160;</span> Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work <span class='add'>be</span> pure, and whether <span class='add'>it be</span> right. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_12">12&#160;</span> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath made even both of them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_13">13&#160;</span> Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, <span class='add'>and</span> thou shalt be satisfied with bread. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> naught, <span class='add'>it is</span> naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_15">15&#160;</span> There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge <span class='add'>are</span> a precious jewel. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_16">16&#160;</span> Take his garment that is surety <span class='add'>for</span> a stranger: and take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_17">17&#160;</span> Bread of deceit <span class='add'>is</span> sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Every</span> purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice make war. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_19">19&#160;</span> He that goeth about <span class='add'>as</span> a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_20">20&#160;</span> Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_21">21&#160;</span> An inheritance <span class='add'>may be</span> gotten hastily at the beginning; but the end thereof shall not be blessed. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_22">22&#160;</span> Say not thou, I will recompense evil; <span class='add'>but</span> wait on the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he shall save thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_23">23&#160;</span> Divers weights <span class='add'>are</span> an abomination unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; and a false balance <span class='add'>is</span> not good.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_24">24&#160;</span> Man’s goings <span class='add'>are</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; how can a man then understand his own way? 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> a snare to the man <span class='add'>who</span> devoureth <span class='add'>that which is</span> holy, and after vows to make enquiry. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_26">26&#160;</span> A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_27">27&#160;</span> The spirit of man <span class='add'>is</span> the candle of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, searching all the inward parts of the belly.
<span class="verse" id="PR20_28">28&#160;</span> Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his throne is upholden by mercy. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_29">29&#160;</span> The glory of young men <span class='add'>is</span> their strength: and the beauty of old men <span class='add'>is</span> the gray head. 
<span class="verse" id="PR20_30">30&#160;</span> The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so <span class='add'>do</span> stripes the inward parts of the belly.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_1">1&#160;</span> The king’s heart <span class='add'>is</span> in the hand of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>as</span> the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_2">2&#160;</span> Every way of a man <span class='add'>is</span> right in his own eyes: but the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> pondereth the hearts. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_3">3&#160;</span> To do justice and judgment <span class='add'>is</span> more acceptable to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> than sacrifice. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_4">4&#160;</span> An high look, and a proud heart, <span class='add'>and</span> the plowing of the wicked, <span class='add'>is</span> sin.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_5">5&#160;</span> The thoughts of the diligent <span class='add'>tend</span> only to plenteousness; but of every one <span class='add'>that is</span> hasty only to want. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_6">6&#160;</span> The getting of treasures by a lying tongue <span class='add'>is</span> a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_7">7&#160;</span> The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse to do judgment.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_8">8&#160;</span> The way of man <span class='add'>is</span> froward and strange: but <span class='add'>as for</span> the pure, his work <span class='add'>is</span> right. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman in a wide house.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_10">10&#160;</span> The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_11">11&#160;</span> When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_12">12&#160;</span> The righteous <span class='add'>man</span> wisely considereth the house of the wicked: <span class='add'>but God</span> overthroweth the wicked for <span class='add'>their</span> wickedness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_13">13&#160;</span> Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_14">14&#160;</span> A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom strong wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction <span class='add'>shall be</span> to the workers of iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_16">16&#160;</span> The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_17">17&#160;</span> He that loveth pleasure <span class='add'>shall be</span> a poor man: he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_18">18&#160;</span> The wicked <span class='add'>shall be</span> a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the upright. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious and an angry woman.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_21">21&#160;</span> He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honour. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_22">22&#160;</span> A wise <span class='add'>man</span> scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_23">23&#160;</span> Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from troubles. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_24">24&#160;</span> Proud <span class='add'>and</span> haughty scorner <span class='add'>is</span> his name, who dealeth in proud wrath.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_25">25&#160;</span> The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to labour. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_26">26&#160;</span> He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous giveth and spareth not. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_27">27&#160;</span> The sacrifice of the wicked <span class='add'>is</span> abomination: how much more, <span class='add'>when</span> he bringeth it with a wicked mind?
<span class="verse" id="PR21_28">28&#160;</span> A false witness shall perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly.
<span class="verse" id="PR21_29">29&#160;</span> A wicked man hardeneth his face: but <span class='add'>as for</span> the upright, he directeth his way.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR21_31">31&#160;</span> The horse <span class='add'>is</span> prepared against the day of battle: but safety <span class='add'>is</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_1">1&#160;</span>A <span class='add'>good</span> name <span class='add'>is</span> rather to be chosen than great riches, <span class='add'>and</span> loving favour rather than silver and gold.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_2">2&#160;</span> The rich and poor meet together: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> the maker of them all. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_3">3&#160;</span> A prudent <span class='add'>man</span> foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple pass on, and are punished. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_4">4&#160;</span> By humility <span class='add'>and</span> the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>are</span> riches, and honour, and life.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_5">5&#160;</span> Thorns <span class='add'>and</span> snares <span class='add'>are</span> in the way of the froward: he that doth keep his soul shall be far from them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_6">6&#160;</span> Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he will not depart from it.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_7">7&#160;</span> The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower <span class='add'>is</span> servant to the lender.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_8">8&#160;</span> He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: and the rod of his anger shall fail.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_9">9&#160;</span> He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of his bread to the poor.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_10">10&#160;</span> Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea, strife and reproach shall cease. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_11">11&#160;</span> He that loveth pureness of heart, <span class='add'>for</span> the grace of his lips the king <span class='add'>shall be</span> his friend.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_12">12&#160;</span> The eyes of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the words of the transgressor.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_13">13&#160;</span> The slothful <span class='add'>man</span> saith, <span class='add'>There is</span> a lion without, I shall be slain in the streets. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_14">14&#160;</span> The mouth of strange women <span class='add'>is</span> a deep pit: he that is abhorred of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall fall therein. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_15">15&#160;</span> Foolishness <span class='add'>is</span> bound in the heart of a child; <span class='add'>but</span> the rod of correction shall drive it far from him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_16">16&#160;</span> He that oppresseth the poor to increase his <span class='add'>riches, and</span> he that giveth to the rich, <span class='add'>shall</span> surely <span class='add'>come</span> to want. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_17">17&#160;</span> Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thine heart unto my knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_18">18&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>it is</span> a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they shall withal be fitted in thy lips.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_19">19&#160;</span> That thy trust may be in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I have made known to thee this day, even to thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_20">20&#160;</span> Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge, 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_21">21&#160;</span> That I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_22">22&#160;</span> Rob not the poor, because he <span class='add'>is</span> poor: neither oppress the afflicted in the gate: 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_23">23&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_24">24&#160;</span> Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou shalt not go: 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_25">25&#160;</span> Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_26">26&#160;</span>Be not thou <span class='add'>one</span> of them that strike hands, <span class='add'>or</span> of them that are sureties for debts. 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_27">27&#160;</span> If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee? 
<span class="verse" id="PR22_28">28&#160;</span> Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.
<span class="verse" id="PR22_29">29&#160;</span> Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before mean <span class='add'>men</span>.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_1">1&#160;</span> When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what <span class='add'>is</span> before thee: 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_2">2&#160;</span> And put a knife to thy throat, if thou <span class='add'>be</span> a man given to appetite. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_3">3&#160;</span> Be not desirous of his dainties: for they <span class='add'>are</span> deceitful meat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_4">4&#160;</span> Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_5">5&#160;</span> Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for <span class='add'>riches</span> certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_6">6&#160;</span> Eat thou not the bread of <span class='add'>him that hath</span> an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainty meats: 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_7">7&#160;</span> For as he thinketh in his heart, so <span class='add'>is</span> he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart <span class='add'>is</span> not with thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_8">8&#160;</span> The morsel <span class='add'>which</span> thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose thy sweet words. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_9">9&#160;</span> Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom of thy words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_10">10&#160;</span> Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the fatherless:
<span class="verse" id="PR23_11">11&#160;</span> For their redeemer <span class='add'>is</span> mighty; he shall plead their cause with thee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_12">12&#160;</span> Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_13">13&#160;</span> Withhold not correction from the child: for <span class='add'>if</span> thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_14">14&#160;</span> Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_15">15&#160;</span> My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_16">16&#160;</span> Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_17">17&#160;</span> Let not thine heart envy sinners: but <span class='add'>be thou</span> in the fear of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> all the day long. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_18">18&#160;</span> For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shall not be cut off.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_19">19&#160;</span> Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_20">20&#160;</span> Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh:
<span class="verse" id="PR23_21">21&#160;</span> For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe <span class='add'>a man</span> with rags. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_22">22&#160;</span> Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_23">23&#160;</span> Buy the truth, and sell <span class='add'>it</span> not; <span class='add'>also</span> wisdom, and instruction, and understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_24">24&#160;</span> The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that begetteth a wise <span class='add'>child</span> shall have joy of him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_25">25&#160;</span> Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_26">26&#160;</span> My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_27">27&#160;</span> For a whore <span class='add'>is</span> a deep ditch; and a strange woman <span class='add'>is</span> a narrow pit. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_28">28&#160;</span> She also lieth in wait as <span class='add'>for</span> a prey, and increaseth the transgressors among men.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_29">29&#160;</span> Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes? 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_30">30&#160;</span> They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_31">31&#160;</span> Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, <span class='add'>when</span> it moveth itself aright. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_32">32&#160;</span> At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_33">33&#160;</span> Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. 
<span class="verse" id="PR23_34">34&#160;</span> Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.
<span class="verse" id="PR23_35">35&#160;</span> They have stricken me, <span class='add'>shalt thou say, and</span> I was not sick; they have beaten me, <span class='add'>and</span> I felt <span class='add'>it</span> not: when shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_1">1&#160;</span> Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_2">2&#160;</span> For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_3">3&#160;</span> Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is established: 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_4">4&#160;</span> And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with all precious and pleasant riches. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_5">5&#160;</span> A wise man <span class='add'>is</span> strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_6">6&#160;</span> For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of counsellors <span class='add'>there is</span> safety. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_7">7&#160;</span> Wisdom <span class='add'>is</span> too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_8">8&#160;</span> He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_9">9&#160;</span> The thought of foolishness <span class='add'>is</span> sin: and the scorner <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to men. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength <span class='add'>is</span> small.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_11">11&#160;</span> If thou forbear to deliver <span class='add'>them that are</span> drawn unto death, and <span class='add'>those that are</span> ready to be slain; 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_12">12&#160;</span> If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider  <span class='add'>it</span>? and he that keepeth thy soul, doth <span class='add'>not</span> he know <span class='add'>it</span>? and shall <span class='add'>not</span> he render to <span class='add'>every</span> man according to his works? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_13">13&#160;</span> My son, eat thou honey, because <span class='add'>it is</span> good; and the honeycomb, <span class='add'>which is</span> sweet to thy taste:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_14">14&#160;</span>So <span class='add'>shall</span> the knowledge of wisdom <span class='add'>be</span> unto thy soul: when thou hast found <span class='add'>it</span>, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_15">15&#160;</span> Lay not wait, O wicked <span class='add'>man</span>, against the dwelling of the righteous; spoil not his resting place: 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_16">16&#160;</span> For a just <span class='add'>man</span> falleth seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into mischief. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_17">17&#160;</span> Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_18">18&#160;</span> Lest the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> see <span class='add'>it</span>, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_19">19&#160;</span> Fret not thyself because of evil <span class='add'>men</span>, neither be thou envious at the wicked;
<span class="verse" id="PR24_20">20&#160;</span> For there shall be no reward to the evil <span class='add'>man;</span> the candle of the wicked shall be put out.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_21">21&#160;</span> My son, fear thou the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> and the king: <span class='add'>and</span> meddle not with them that are given to change:
<span class="verse" id="PR24_22">22&#160;</span> For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_23">23&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>things</span> also <span class='add'>belong</span> to the wise. <span class='add'>It is</span> not good to have respect of persons in judgment. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_24">24&#160;</span> He that saith unto the wicked, Thou <span class='add'>art</span> righteous; him shall the people curse, nations shall abhor him: 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_25">25&#160;</span> But to them that rebuke <span class='add'>him</span> shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Every man</span> shall kiss <span class='add'>his</span> lips that giveth a right answer.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_27">27&#160;</span> Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the field; and afterwards build thine house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_28">28&#160;</span> Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and deceive <span class='add'>not</span> with thy lips. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_29">29&#160;</span> Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will render to the man according to his work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_30">30&#160;</span> I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding; 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_31">31&#160;</span> And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, <span class='add'>and</span> nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down. 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_32">32&#160;</span> Then I saw, <span class='add'>and</span> considered <span class='add'>it</span> well: I looked upon <span class='add'>it, and</span> received instruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR24_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Yet</span> a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep: 
<span class="verse" id="PR24_34">34&#160;</span> So shall thy poverty come <span class='add'>as</span> one that travelleth; and thy want as an armed man.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_1">1&#160;</span>These <span class='add'>are</span> also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings <span class='add'>is</span> to search out a matter. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_3">3&#160;</span> The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings <span class='add'>is</span> unsearchable.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_4">4&#160;</span> Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the finer. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_5">5&#160;</span> Take away the wicked <span class='add'>from</span> before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_6">6&#160;</span> Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great <span class='add'>men:</span>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_7">7&#160;</span> For better <span class='add'>it is</span> that it be said unto thee, Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_8">8&#160;</span> Go not forth hastily to strive, lest <span class='add'>thou know not</span> what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_9">9&#160;</span> Debate thy cause with thy neighbour <span class='add'>himself;</span> and discover not a secret to another:
<span class="verse" id="PR25_10">10&#160;</span> Lest he that heareth <span class='add'>it</span> put thee to shame, and thine infamy turn not away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_11">11&#160;</span> A word fitly spoken <span class='add'>is like</span> apples of gold in pictures of silver.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, <span class='add'>so is</span> a wise reprover upon an obedient ear. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_13">13&#160;</span> As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, <span class='add'>so is</span> a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his masters. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_14">14&#160;</span> Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift <span class='add'>is like</span> clouds and wind without rain.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_15">15&#160;</span> By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_16">16&#160;</span> Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_17">17&#160;</span> Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour’s house; lest he be weary of thee, and <span class='add'>so</span> hate thee.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_18">18&#160;</span> A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour <span class='add'>is</span> a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_19">19&#160;</span> Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble <span class='add'>is like</span> a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, <span class='add'>and as</span> vinegar upon nitre, so <span class='add'>is</span> he that singeth songs to an heavy heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_21">21&#160;</span> If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink: 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_22">22&#160;</span> For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall reward thee. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_23">23&#160;</span> The north wind driveth away rain: so <span class='add'>doth</span> an angry countenance a backbiting tongue.
<span class="verse" id="PR25_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman and in a wide house. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> cold waters to a thirsty soul, so <span class='add'>is</span> good news from a far country. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_26">26&#160;</span> A righteous man falling down before the wicked <span class='add'>is as</span> a troubled fountain, and a corrupt spring. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> not good to eat much honey: so <span class='add'>for men</span> to search their own glory <span class='add'>is not</span> glory. 
<span class="verse" id="PR25_28">28&#160;</span> He that <span class='add'>hath</span> no rule over his own spirit <span class='add'>is like</span> a city <span class='add'>that is</span> broken down, <span class='add'>and</span> without walls.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_1">1&#160;</span> As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not seemly for a fool. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_2">2&#160;</span> As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_3">3&#160;</span> A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the fool’s back. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_4">4&#160;</span> Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_5">5&#160;</span> Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_6">6&#160;</span> He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the feet, <span class='add'>and</span> drinketh damage.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_7">7&#160;</span> The legs of the lame are not equal: so <span class='add'>is</span> a parable in the mouth of fools.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_8">8&#160;</span> As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so <span class='add'>is</span> he that giveth honour to a fool.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so <span class='add'>is</span> a parable in the mouth of fools. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_10">10&#160;</span> The great <span class='add'>God</span> that formed all <span class='add'>things</span> both rewardeth the fool, and rewardeth transgressors.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_11">11&#160;</span> As a dog returneth to his vomit, <span class='add'>so</span> a fool returneth to his folly.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_12">12&#160;</span> Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? <span class='add'>there is</span> more hope of a fool than of him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_13">13&#160;</span> The slothful <span class='add'>man</span> saith, <span class='add'>There is</span> a lion in the way; a lion <span class='add'>is</span> in the streets. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the door turneth upon his hinges, so <span class='add'>doth</span> the slothful upon his bed. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_15">15&#160;</span> The slothful hideth his hand in <span class='add'>his</span> bosom; it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_16">16&#160;</span> The sluggard <span class='add'>is</span> wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can render a reason. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_17">17&#160;</span> He that passeth by, <span class='add'>and</span> meddleth with strife <span class='add'>belonging</span> not to him, <span class='add'>is like</span> one that taketh a dog by the ears.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_18">18&#160;</span> As a mad <span class='add'>man</span> who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death,
<span class="verse" id="PR26_19">19&#160;</span>So <span class='add'>is</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_20">20&#160;</span> Where no wood is, <span class='add'>there</span> the fire goeth out: so where <span class='add'>there is</span> no talebearer, the strife ceaseth.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> coals <span class='add'>are</span> to burning coals, and wood to fire; so <span class='add'>is</span> a contentious man to kindle strife. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_22">22&#160;</span> The words of a talebearer <span class='add'>are</span> as wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_23">23&#160;</span> Burning lips and a wicked heart <span class='add'>are like</span> a potsherd covered with silver dross. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_24">24&#160;</span> He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit within him;
<span class="verse" id="PR26_25">25&#160;</span> When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for <span class='add'>there are</span> seven abominations in his heart.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Whose</span> hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be shewed before the <span class='add'>whole</span> congregation.
<span class="verse" id="PR26_27">27&#160;</span> Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR26_28">28&#160;</span> A lying tongue hateth <span class='add'>those that are</span> afflicted by it; and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_1">1&#160;</span> Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_2">2&#160;</span> Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_3">3&#160;</span> A stone <span class='add'>is</span> heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool’s wrath <span class='add'>is</span> heavier than them both.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_4">4&#160;</span> Wrath <span class='add'>is</span> cruel, and anger <span class='add'>is</span> outrageous; but who <span class='add'>is</span> able to stand before envy?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_5">5&#160;</span> Open rebuke <span class='add'>is</span> better than secret love. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_6">6&#160;</span> Faithful <span class='add'>are</span> the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy <span class='add'>are</span> deceitful.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_7">7&#160;</span> The full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_8">8&#160;</span> As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so <span class='add'>is</span> a man that wandereth from his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_9">9&#160;</span> Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so <span class='add'>doth</span> the sweetness of a man’s friend by hearty counsel.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_10">10&#160;</span> Thine own friend, and thy father’s friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother’s house in the day of thy calamity: <span class='add'>for</span> better <span class='add'>is</span> a neighbour <span class='add'>that is</span> near than a brother far off. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_11">11&#160;</span> My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_12">12&#160;</span> A prudent <span class='add'>man</span> foreseeth the evil, <span class='add'>and</span> hideth himself; <span class='add'>but</span> the simple pass on, <span class='add'>and</span> are punished. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_13">13&#160;</span> Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_14">14&#160;</span> He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_15">15&#160;</span> A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_16">16&#160;</span> Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his right hand, <span class='add'>which</span> bewrayeth <span class='add'>itself</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_17">17&#160;</span> Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_18">18&#160;</span> Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that waiteth on his master shall be honoured. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_19">19&#160;</span> As in water face <span class='add'>answereth</span> to face, so the heart of man to man. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_20">20&#160;</span> Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are never satisfied.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so <span class='add'>is</span> a man to his praise. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_22">22&#160;</span> Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, <span class='add'>yet</span> will not his foolishness depart from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_23">23&#160;</span> Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, <span class='add'>and</span> look well to thy herds.
<span class="verse" id="PR27_24">24&#160;</span> For riches <span class='add'>are</span> not for ever: and doth the crown <span class='add'>endure</span> to every generation?
<span class="verse" id="PR27_25">25&#160;</span> The hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_26">26&#160;</span> The lambs <span class='add'>are</span> for thy clothing, and the goats <span class='add'>are</span> the price of the field. 
<span class="verse" id="PR27_27">27&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>thou shalt have</span> goats’ milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy household, and <span class='add'>for</span> the maintenance for thy maidens.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_1">1&#160;</span> The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_2">2&#160;</span> For the transgression of a land many <span class='add'>are</span> the princes thereof: but by a man of understanding <span class='add'>and</span> knowledge the state <span class='add'>thereof</span> shall be prolonged.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_3">3&#160;</span> A poor man that oppresseth the poor <span class='add'>is like</span> a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_4">4&#160;</span> They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the law contend with them. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_5">5&#160;</span> Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> understand all <span class='add'>things</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_6">6&#160;</span> Better <span class='add'>is</span> the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse <span class='add'>in his</span> ways, though he <span class='add'>be</span> rich. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_7">7&#160;</span> Whoso keepeth the law <span class='add'>is</span> a wise son: but he that is a companion of riotous <span class='add'>men</span> shameth his father.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_8">8&#160;</span> He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_9">9&#160;</span> He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer <span class='add'>shall be</span> abomination. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_10">10&#160;</span> Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good <span class='add'>things</span> in possession. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_11">11&#160;</span> The rich man <span class='add'>is</span> wise in his own conceit; but the poor that hath understanding searcheth him out.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_12">12&#160;</span> When righteous <span class='add'>men</span> do rejoice, <span class='add'>there is</span> great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man is hidden.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_13">13&#160;</span> He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confesseth and forsaketh <span class='add'>them</span> shall have mercy. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_14">14&#160;</span> Happy <span class='add'>is</span> the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='add'>As</span> a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; <span class='add'>so is</span> a wicked ruler over the poor people. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_16">16&#160;</span> The prince that wanteth understanding <span class='add'>is</span> also a great oppressor: <span class='add'>but</span> he that hateth covetousness shall prolong <span class='add'>his</span> days. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_17">17&#160;</span> A man that doeth violence to the blood of <span class='add'>any</span> person shall flee to the pit; let no man stay him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_18">18&#160;</span> Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: but <span class='add'>he that is</span> perverse <span class='add'>in his</span> ways shall fall at once. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_19">19&#160;</span> He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that followeth after vain <span class='add'>persons</span> shall have poverty enough. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_20">20&#160;</span> A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_21">21&#160;</span> To have respect of persons <span class='add'>is</span> not good: for for a piece of bread <span class='add'>that</span> man will transgress. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_22">22&#160;</span> He that hasteth to be rich <span class='add'>hath</span> an evil eye, and considereth not that poverty shall come upon him.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_23">23&#160;</span> He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_24">24&#160;</span> Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, <span class='add'>It is</span> no transgression; the same <span class='add'>is</span> the companion of a destroyer.
<span class="verse" id="PR28_25">25&#160;</span> He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that putteth his trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be made fat. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_26">26&#160;</span> He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_27">27&#160;</span> He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse. 
<span class="verse" id="PR28_28">28&#160;</span> When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the righteous increase.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR29_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_1">1&#160;</span> He, that being often reproved hardeneth <span class='add'>his</span> neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_2">2&#160;</span> When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_3">3&#160;</span> Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: but he that keepeth company with harlots spendeth <span class='add'>his</span> substance. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_4">4&#160;</span> The king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_5">5&#160;</span> A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_6">6&#160;</span> In the transgression of an evil man <span class='add'>there is</span> a snare: but the righteous doth sing and rejoice. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_7">7&#160;</span> The righteous considereth the cause of the poor: <span class='add'>but</span> the wicked regardeth not to know <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_8">8&#160;</span> Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise <span class='add'>men</span> turn away wrath.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>If</span> a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or laugh, <span class='add'>there is</span> no rest. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_10">10&#160;</span> The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_11">11&#160;</span> A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise <span class='add'>man</span> keepeth it in till afterwards. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_12">12&#160;</span> If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants <span class='add'>are</span> wicked. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_13">13&#160;</span> The poor and the deceitful man meet together: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> lighteneth both their eyes.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_14">14&#160;</span> The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be established for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_15">15&#160;</span> The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left <span class='add'>to himself</span> bringeth his mother to shame. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_16">16&#160;</span> When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth: but the righteous shall see their fall. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_17">17&#160;</span> Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give delight unto thy soul. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_18">18&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>there is</span> no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth the law, happy <span class='add'>is</span> he.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_19">19&#160;</span> A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand he will not answer. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_20">20&#160;</span> Seest thou a man <span class='add'>that is</span> hasty in his words? <span class='add'>there is</span> more hope of a fool than of him.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_21">21&#160;</span> He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall have him become <span class='add'>his</span> son at the length. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_22">22&#160;</span> An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in transgression. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_23">23&#160;</span> A man’s pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the humble in spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_24">24&#160;</span> Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth cursing, and bewrayeth <span class='add'>it</span> not. 
<span class="verse" id="PR29_25">25&#160;</span> The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> shall be safe.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_26">26&#160;</span> Many seek the ruler’s favour; but <span class='add'>every</span> man’s judgment <span class='add'>cometh</span> from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.
<span class="verse" id="PR29_27">27&#160;</span> An unjust man <span class='add'>is</span> an abomination to the just: and <span class='add'>he that is</span> upright in the way <span class='add'>is</span> abomination to the wicked.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR30_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_1">1&#160;</span> The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, <span class='add'>even</span> the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal, 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_2">2&#160;</span>Surely I <span class='add'>am</span> more brutish than <span class='add'>any</span> man, and have not the understanding of a man. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_3">3&#160;</span> I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_4">4&#160;</span> Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all the ends of the earth? what <span class='add'>is</span> his name, and what <span class='add'>is</span> his son’s name, if thou canst tell? 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_5">5&#160;</span> Every word of God <span class='add'>is</span> pure: he <span class='add'>is</span> a shield unto them that put their trust in him.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_6">6&#160;</span> Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_7">7&#160;</span> Two <span class='add'>things</span> have I required of thee; deny me <span class='add'>them</span> not before I die:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_8">8&#160;</span> Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_9">9&#160;</span> Lest I be full, and deny <span class='add'>thee</span>, and say, Who <span class='add'>is</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God <span class='add'>in vain</span>.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_10">10&#160;</span> Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation <span class='add'>that</span> curseth their father, and doth not bless their mother. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation <span class='add'>that are</span> pure in their own eyes, and <span class='add'>yet</span> is not washed from their filthiness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> a generation, whose teeth <span class='add'>are as</span> swords, and their jaw teeth <span class='add'>as</span> knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from <span class='add'>among</span> men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_15">15&#160;</span> The horseleach hath two daughters, <span class='add'>crying</span>, Give, give. There are three <span class='add'>things that</span> are never satisfied, <span class='add'>yea</span>, four <span class='add'>things</span> say not, <span class='add'>It is</span> enough:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_16">16&#160;</span> The grave; and the barren womb; the earth <span class='add'>that</span> is not filled with water; and the fire <span class='add'>that</span> saith not, <span class='add'>It is</span> enough. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_17">17&#160;</span> The eye <span class='add'>that</span> mocketh at <span class='add'>his</span> father, and despiseth to obey <span class='add'>his</span> mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_18">18&#160;</span> There be three <span class='add'>things which</span> are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not: 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_19">19&#160;</span> The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_20">20&#160;</span>Such <span class='add'>is</span> the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_21">21&#160;</span> For three <span class='add'>things</span> the earth is disquieted, and for four <span class='add'>which</span> it cannot bear: 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_22">22&#160;</span> For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he is filled with meat; 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_23">23&#160;</span> For an odious <span class='add'>woman</span> when she is married; and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_24">24&#160;</span> There be four <span class='add'>things which are</span> little upon the earth, but they <span class='add'>are</span> exceeding wise:
<span class="verse" id="PR30_25">25&#160;</span> The ants <span class='add'>are</span> a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the summer; 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_26">26&#160;</span> The conies <span class='add'>are but</span> a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks; 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_27">27&#160;</span> The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands;
<span class="verse" id="PR30_28">28&#160;</span> The spider taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings’ palaces. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_29">29&#160;</span> There be three <span class='add'>things</span> which go well, yea, four are comely in going: 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_30">30&#160;</span> A lion <span class='add'>which is</span> strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for any; 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_31">31&#160;</span> A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against whom <span class='add'>there is</span> no rising up.
<span class="verse" id="PR30_32">32&#160;</span> If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, <span class='add'>lay</span> thine hand upon thy mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="PR30_33">33&#160;</span> Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR31_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_1">1&#160;</span> The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_2">2&#160;</span> What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows? 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_3">3&#160;</span> Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> not for kings, O Lemuel, <span class='add'>it is</span> not for kings to drink wine; nor for princes strong drink: 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_5">5&#160;</span> Lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_6">6&#160;</span> Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_7">7&#160;</span> Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_8">8&#160;</span> Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_9">9&#160;</span> Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the poor and needy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price <span class='add'>is</span> far above rubies. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_11">11&#160;</span> The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_12">12&#160;</span> She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_13">13&#160;</span> She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her hands. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_14">14&#160;</span> She is like the merchants’ ships; she bringeth her food from afar. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_15">15&#160;</span> She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_16">16&#160;</span> She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_17">17&#160;</span> She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_18">18&#160;</span> She perceiveth that her merchandise <span class='add'>is</span> good: her candle goeth not out by night.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_19">19&#160;</span> She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaff. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_20">20&#160;</span> She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_21">21&#160;</span> She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her household <span class='add'>are</span> clothed with scarlet.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_22">22&#160;</span> She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing <span class='add'>is</span> silk and purple. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_23">23&#160;</span> Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_24">24&#160;</span> She maketh fine linen, and selleth <span class='add'>it;</span> and delivereth girdles unto the merchant. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_25">25&#160;</span> Strength and honour <span class='add'>are</span> her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_26">26&#160;</span> She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue <span class='add'>is</span> the law of kindness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_27">27&#160;</span> She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_28">28&#160;</span> Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband <span class='add'>also</span>, and he praiseth her. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_29">29&#160;</span> Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.
<span class="verse" id="PR31_30">30&#160;</span> Favour <span class='add'>is</span> deceitful, and beauty <span class='add'>is</span> vain: <span class='add'>but</span> a woman <span class='add'>that</span> feareth the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, she shall be praised. 
<span class="verse" id="PR31_31">31&#160;</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in the gates. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
