<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Jonah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Jonah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JON.xhtml#JH4_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JH0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Jonah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JH1_1">1&#160;</span> Now the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_2">2&#160;</span> Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_3">3&#160;</span> But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH1_4">4&#160;</span>¶ But the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_5">5&#160;</span> Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and cast forth the wares that <span class='add'>were</span> in the ship into the sea, to lighten <span class='add'>it</span> of them. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_6">6&#160;</span> So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we perish not. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_7">7&#160;</span> And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil <span class='add'>is</span> upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_8">8&#160;</span> Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil <span class='add'>is</span> upon us; What <span class='add'>is</span> thine occupation? and whence comest thou? what <span class='add'>is</span> thy country? and of what people <span class='add'>art</span> thou? 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_9">9&#160;</span> And he said unto them, I <span class='add'>am</span> an Hebrew; and I fear the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry <span class='add'>land</span>.<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a><span class='nd'></span><span class='nd'></span> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_10">10&#160;</span> Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, because he had told them.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH1_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous.<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_12">12&#160;</span> And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest <span class='add'>is</span> upon you. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_13">13&#160;</span> Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring <span class='add'>it</span> to the land; but they could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_14">14&#160;</span> Wherefore they cried unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, We beseech thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man’s life, and lay not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, hast done as it pleased thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_15">15&#160;</span> So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging.<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH1_16">16&#160;</span> Then the men feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and made vows.<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡‡</a><span class='nd'></span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH1_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Now the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§§</a>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH2_1">1&#160;</span> Then Jonah prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> his God out of the fish’s belly, 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_2">2&#160;</span> And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, <span class='add'>and</span> thou heardest my voice.<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_3">3&#160;</span> For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas; and the floods compassed  me about: all thy billows and thy waves passed over me.<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_4">4&#160;</span> Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy holy temple. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_5">5&#160;</span> The waters compassed me about, <span class='add'>even</span> to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_6">6&#160;</span> I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars <span class='add'>was</span> about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from corruption, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span> my God.<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a><a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_7">7&#160;</span> When my soul fainted within me I remembered the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: and my prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_8">8&#160;</span> They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. 
<span class="verse" id="JH2_9">9&#160;</span> But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay <span class='add'>that</span> that I have vowed. Salvation <span class='add'>is</span> of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH2_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry <span class='add'>land</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH3_1">1&#160;</span> And the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> came unto Jonah the second time, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_2">2&#160;</span> Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_3">3&#160;</span> So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days’ journey.<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_4">4&#160;</span> And Jonah began to enter into the city a day’s journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH3_5">5&#160;</span>¶ So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_6">6&#160;</span> For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered <span class='add'>him</span> with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_7">7&#160;</span>And he caused <span class='add'>it</span> to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink water:<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_8">8&#160;</span> But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that <span class='add'>is</span> in their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="JH3_9">9&#160;</span> Who can tell <span class='add'>if</span> God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH3_10">10&#160;</span>¶ And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did <span class='add'>it</span> not.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JH4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH4_1">1&#160;</span> But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_2">2&#160;</span> And he prayed unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and said, I pray thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>was</span> not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou <span class='add'>art</span> a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_3">3&#160;</span> Therefore now, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for <span class='add'>it is</span> better for me to die than to live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Doest thou well to be angry?<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JH4_5">5&#160;</span> So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see what would become of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_6">6&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> God prepared a gourd, and made <span class='add'>it</span> to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_7">7&#160;</span> But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered. 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_8">8&#160;</span> And it came to pass, when the sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, <span class='add'>It is</span> better for me to die than to live.<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_9">9&#160;</span> And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, <span class='add'>even</span> unto death.<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a><a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_10">10&#160;</span> Then said the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night:<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JH4_11">11&#160;</span> And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and <span class='add'>also</span> much cattle? </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">Jonah: Gr. Jonas</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">sent out: Heb. cast forth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.4</a>
 <span class="ft">was like…: Heb. thought to be broken</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_9"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">the LORD: or, JEHOVAH</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_10"><span class="notemark">**</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">exceedingly…: Heb. with great fear</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_11"><span class="notemark">††</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">may…: Heb. may be silent from us</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_11"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">wrought…: or, grew more and more tempestuous: Heb. went</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_13"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">rowed: Heb. digged</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_13"><span class="notemark">***</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">wrought…: or, grew more and more tempestuous: Heb. went</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_15"><span class="notemark">†††</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">ceased: Heb. stood</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_16"><span class="notemark">‡‡‡</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">offered…: Heb. sacrifice unto the LORD, and vowed vows</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH1_17"><span class="notemark">§§§</span> 1.17</a>
 <span class="ft">belly: Heb. bowels</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">by…: or, out of mine affliction</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH2_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">hell: or, the grave</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH2_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">midst: Heb. heart</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH2_6"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">bottoms: Heb. cuttings off</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH2_6"><span class="notemark">**</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">corruption: or, the pit</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">exceeding: Heb. of God</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH3_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">published: Heb. said</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH3_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.7</a>
 <span class="ft">nobles: Heb. great men</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.4</a>
 <span class="ft">Doest…: or, Art thou greatly angry?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">gourd: or, palmcrist: Heb. Kikajon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">was…: Heb. rejoiced with great joy</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_8"><span class="notemark">§</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">vehement: or, silent</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_9"><span class="notemark">**</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">Doest…: or, Art thou greatly angry?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_9"><span class="notemark">††</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">I do well…: or, I am greatly angry</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_10"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">had pity: or, spared</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JH4_10"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 4.10</a>
 <span class="ft">came…: Heb. was the son of the night</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
