<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Lamentations 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Lamentations</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='LAM.xhtml#LM5_0'>5</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='LM0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Lamentations of Jeremiah  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="LM1_1">1&#160;</span> How doth the city sit solitary, <span class='add'>that was</span> full of people! <span class='add'>how</span> is she become as a widow! she <span class='add'>that was</span> great among the nations, <span class='add'>and</span> princess among the provinces, <span class='add'>how</span> is she become tributary! 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_2">2&#160;</span> She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears <span class='add'>are</span> on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort <span class='add'>her:</span> all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_3">3&#160;</span> Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: all her persecutors overtook her between the straits.<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_4">4&#160;</span> The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she <span class='add'>is</span> in bitterness. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_5">5&#160;</span> Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: her children are gone into captivity before the enemy. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_6">6&#160;</span> And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts <span class='add'>that</span> find no pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_7">7&#160;</span> Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the adversaries saw her, <span class='add'>and</span> did mock at her sabbaths.<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_8">8&#160;</span> Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_9">9&#160;</span> Her filthiness <span class='add'>is</span> in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end; therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, behold my affliction: for the enemy hath magnified <span class='add'>himself</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_10">10&#160;</span> The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for she hath seen <span class='add'>that</span> the heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom thou didst command <span class='add'>that</span> they should not enter into thy congregation.<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_11">11&#160;</span> All her people sigh, they seek bread; they have given their pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul: see, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and consider; for I am become vile.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Is it</span> nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath afflicted <span class='add'>me</span> in the day of his fierce anger.<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_13">13&#160;</span> From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate <span class='add'>and</span> faint all the day. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_14">14&#160;</span> The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, <span class='add'>and</span> come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall, the Lord hath delivered me into <span class='add'>their</span> hands, <span class='add'>from whom</span> I am not able to rise up. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_15">15&#160;</span> The Lord hath trodden under foot all my mighty <span class='add'>men</span> in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men: the Lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, <span class='add'>as</span> in a winepress.<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_16">16&#160;</span>For these <span class='add'>things</span> I weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_17">17&#160;</span> Zion spreadeth forth her hands, <span class='add'>and there is</span> none to comfort her: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath commanded concerning Jacob, <span class='add'>that</span> his adversaries <span class='add'>should be</span> round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM1_18">18&#160;</span>¶ The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> is righteous; for I have rebelled against his commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_19">19&#160;</span> I called for my lovers, <span class='add'>but</span> they deceived me: my priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to relieve their souls. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_20">20&#160;</span> Behold, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; for I <span class='add'>am</span> in distress: my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home <span class='add'>there is</span> as death. 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_21">21&#160;</span> They have heard that I sigh: <span class='add'>there is</span> none to comfort me: all mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast done <span class='add'>it:</span> thou wilt bring the day <span class='add'>that</span> thou hast called, and they shall be like unto me.<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM1_22">22&#160;</span> Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs <span class='add'>are</span> many, and my heart <span class='add'>is</span> faint.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM2_1">1&#160;</span> How hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, <span class='add'>and</span> cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger! 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_2">2&#160;</span> The Lord hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he hath brought <span class='add'>them</span> down to the ground: he hath polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_3">3&#160;</span> He hath cut off in <span class='add'>his</span> fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, <span class='add'>which</span> devoureth round about. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_4">4&#160;</span> He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all <span class='add'>that were</span> pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_5">5&#160;</span> The Lord was as an enemy: he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_6">6&#160;</span> And he hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as <span class='add'>if it were of</span> a garden: he hath destroyed his places of the assembly: the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_7">7&#160;</span> The Lord hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary, he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces; they have made a noise in the house of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as in the day of a solemn feast.<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_8">8&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament; they languished together.<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_9">9&#160;</span> Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes <span class='add'>are</span> among the Gentiles: the law <span class='add'>is</span> no <span class='add'>more;</span> her prophets also find no vision from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM2_10">10&#160;</span> The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, <span class='add'>and</span> keep silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_11">11&#160;</span> Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of the city.<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_12">12&#160;</span> They say to their mothers, Where <span class='add'>is</span> corn and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mothers’ bosom. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_13">13&#160;</span> What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach <span class='add'>is</span> great like the sea: who can heal thee? 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_14">14&#160;</span> Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee: and they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee false burdens and causes of banishment. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_15">15&#160;</span> All that pass by clap <span class='add'>their</span> hands at thee; they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, <span class='add'>saying, Is</span> this the city that <span class='add'>men</span> call The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_16">16&#160;</span> All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed <span class='add'>her</span> up: certainly this <span class='add'>is</span> the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_17">17&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath done <span class='add'>that</span> which he had devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused <span class='add'>thine</span> enemy to rejoice over thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_18">18&#160;</span> Their heart cried unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thine eye cease. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_19">19&#160;</span> Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord: lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the top of every street. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM2_20">20&#160;</span>¶ Behold, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit, <span class='add'>and</span> children of a span long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_21">21&#160;</span> The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain <span class='add'>them</span> in the day of thine anger; thou hast killed, <span class='add'>and</span> not pitied. 
<span class="verse" id="LM2_22">22&#160;</span> Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in the day of the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> anger none escaped nor remained: those that I have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_1">1&#160;</span>I <span class='add'>am</span> the man <span class='add'>that</span> hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_2">2&#160;</span> He hath led me, and brought <span class='add'>me into</span> darkness, but not <span class='add'>into</span> light. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_3">3&#160;</span> Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand <span class='add'>against me</span> all the day. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_4">4&#160;</span> My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_5">5&#160;</span> He hath builded against me, and compassed <span class='add'>me</span> with gall and travail. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_6">6&#160;</span> He hath set me in dark places, as <span class='add'>they that be</span> dead of old. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_7">7&#160;</span> He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my chain heavy. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_8">8&#160;</span> Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_9">9&#160;</span> He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths crooked. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_10">10&#160;</span>He <span class='add'>was</span> unto me <span class='add'>as</span> a bear lying in wait, <span class='add'>and as</span> a lion in secret places. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_11">11&#160;</span> He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he hath made me desolate. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_12">12&#160;</span> He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_13">13&#160;</span> He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_14">14&#160;</span> I was a derision to all my people; <span class='add'>and</span> their song all the day. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_15">15&#160;</span> He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with wormwood.<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_16">16&#160;</span> He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered me with ashes.<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_17">17&#160;</span> And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat prosperity.<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_18">18&#160;</span> And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_19">19&#160;</span> Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_20">20&#160;</span> My soul hath <span class='add'>them</span> still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_21">21&#160;</span> This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_22">22&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>It is of</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD’s</span> mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They are</span> new every morning: great <span class='add'>is</span> thy faithfulness. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_24">24&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> my portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in him. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_25">25&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> good unto them that wait for him, to the soul <span class='add'>that</span> seeketh him. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> good that <span class='add'>a man</span> should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='add'>It is</span> good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_28">28&#160;</span> He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne <span class='add'>it</span> upon him. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_29">29&#160;</span> He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_30">30&#160;</span> He giveth <span class='add'>his</span> cheek to him that smiteth him: he is filled full with reproach. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_31">31&#160;</span> For the Lord will not cast off for ever: 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_32">32&#160;</span> But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_33">33&#160;</span> For he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men.<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_34">34&#160;</span> To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth, 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_35">35&#160;</span> To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most High,<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_36">36&#160;</span> To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord approveth not.<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†††</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_37">37&#160;</span>¶ Who <span class='add'>is</span> he <span class='add'>that</span> saith, and it cometh to pass, <span class='add'>when</span> the Lord commandeth <span class='add'>it</span> not? 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_38">38&#160;</span> Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth not evil and good? 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_39">39&#160;</span> Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_40">40&#160;</span> Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_41">41&#160;</span> Let us lift up our heart with <span class='add'>our</span> hands unto God in the heavens. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_42">42&#160;</span> We have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_43">43&#160;</span> Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_44">44&#160;</span> Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that <span class='add'>our</span> prayer should not pass through. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_45">45&#160;</span> Thou hast made us <span class='add'>as</span> the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_46">46&#160;</span> All our enemies have opened their mouths against us. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_47">47&#160;</span> Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_48">48&#160;</span> Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_49">49&#160;</span> Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermission, 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_50">50&#160;</span> Till the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> look down, and behold from heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_51">51&#160;</span> Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my city.<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§§</a><a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_52">52&#160;</span> Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_53">53&#160;</span> They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_54">54&#160;</span> Waters flowed over mine head; <span class='add'>then</span> I said, I am cut off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_55">55&#160;</span>¶ I called upon thy name, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, out of the low dungeon. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_56">56&#160;</span> Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_57">57&#160;</span> Thou drewest near in the day <span class='add'>that</span> I called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear not. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_58">58&#160;</span> O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast redeemed my life. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_59">59&#160;</span> O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_60">60&#160;</span> Thou hast seen all their vengeance <span class='add'>and</span> all their imaginations against me. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_61">61&#160;</span> Thou hast heard their reproach, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, <span class='add'>and</span> all their imaginations against me; 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_62">62&#160;</span> The lips of those that rose up against me, and their device against me all the day. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_63">63&#160;</span> Behold their sitting down, and their rising up; I <span class='add'>am</span> their musick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM3_64">64&#160;</span>¶ Render unto them a recompence, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, according to the work of their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_65">65&#160;</span> Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.<a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM3_66">66&#160;</span> Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_1">1&#160;</span> How is the gold become dim! <span class='add'>how</span> is the most fine gold changed! the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_2">2&#160;</span> The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter! 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_3">3&#160;</span> Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people <span class='add'>is become</span> cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.<a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_4">4&#160;</span> The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth for thirst: the young children ask bread, <span class='add'>and</span> no man breaketh <span class='add'>it</span> unto them. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_5">5&#160;</span> They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_6">6&#160;</span> For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.<a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_7">7&#160;</span> Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing <span class='add'>was</span> of sapphire: 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_8">8&#160;</span> Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick.<a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='add'>They that be</span> slain with the sword are better than <span class='add'>they that be</span> slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for <span class='add'>want of</span> the fruits of the field.<a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_10">10&#160;</span> The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children: they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_11">11&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_12">12&#160;</span> The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_13">13&#160;</span>¶ For the sins of her prophets, <span class='add'>and</span> the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her, 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_14">14&#160;</span> They have wandered <span class='add'>as</span> blind <span class='add'>men</span> in the streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_15">15&#160;</span> They cried unto them, Depart ye; <span class='add'>it is</span> unclean; depart, depart, touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the heathen, They shall no more sojourn <span class='add'>there</span>.<a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_16">16&#160;</span> The anger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath divided them; he will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not the elders.<a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_17">17&#160;</span> As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching we have watched for a nation <span class='add'>that</span> could not save <span class='add'>us</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_18">18&#160;</span> They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_19">19&#160;</span> Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="LM4_20">20&#160;</span> The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_21">21&#160;</span>¶ Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself naked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM4_22">22&#160;</span>¶ The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion; he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will discover thy sins.<a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='LM5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM5_1">1&#160;</span> Remember, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our reproach. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_2">2&#160;</span> Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_3">3&#160;</span> We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers <span class='add'>are</span> as widows. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_4">4&#160;</span> We have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.<a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_5">5&#160;</span> Our necks <span class='add'>are</span> under persecution: we labour, <span class='add'>and</span> have no rest.<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_6">6&#160;</span> We have given the hand <span class='add'>to</span> the Egyptians, <span class='add'>and to</span> the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_7">7&#160;</span> Our fathers have sinned, <span class='add'>and are</span> not; and we have borne their iniquities. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_8">8&#160;</span> Servants have ruled over us: <span class='add'>there is</span> none that doth deliver <span class='add'>us</span> out of their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_9">9&#160;</span> We gat our bread with <span class='add'>the peril of</span> our lives because of the sword of the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_10">10&#160;</span> Our skin was black like an oven because of the terrible famine.<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_11">11&#160;</span> They ravished the women in Zion, <span class='add'>and</span> the maids in the cities of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_12">12&#160;</span> Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not honoured. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_13">13&#160;</span> They took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the wood. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_14">14&#160;</span> The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their musick. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_15">15&#160;</span> The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_16">16&#160;</span> The crown is fallen <span class='add'>from</span> our head: woe unto us, that we have sinned!<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LM5_17">17&#160;</span> For this our heart is faint; for these <span class='add'>things</span> our eyes are dim. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_18">18&#160;</span> Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes walk upon it. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_19">19&#160;</span> Thou, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, remainest  for ever; thy throne from generation to generation. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_20">20&#160;</span> Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, <span class='add'>and</span> forsake us so long time?<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_21">21&#160;</span> Turn thou us unto thee, O <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and we shall be turned; renew our days as of old. 
<span class="verse" id="LM5_22">22&#160;</span> But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.3</a>
 <span class="ft">because of great…: Heb. for the greatness of servitude</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">pleasant: or, desirable</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">is…: Heb. is become a removing, or, wandering</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_10"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1.10</a>
 <span class="ft">pleasant: or, desirable</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_11"><span class="notemark">**</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">to…: or, to make the soul to come again</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_12"><span class="notemark">††</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Is it…: or, It is nothing</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_12"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">pass by: Heb. pass by the way?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_15"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">the virgin…: or, the winepress of the virgin, etc</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_16"><span class="notemark">***</span> 1.16</a>
 <span class="ft">relieve: Heb. bring back</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_18"><span class="notemark">†††</span> 1.18</a>
 <span class="ft">commandment: Heb. mouth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM1_21"><span class="notemark">‡‡‡</span> 1.21</a>
 <span class="ft">called: or, proclaimed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">brought…: Heb. made to touch</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">all…: Heb. all the desirable of the eye</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">tabernacle: or, hedge</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_7"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">given up: Heb. shut up</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_8"><span class="notemark">**</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">destroying: Heb. swallowing up</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_11"><span class="notemark">††</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">swoon: or, faint</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_15"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">by: Heb. by the way</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM2_20"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 2.20</a>
 <span class="ft">of a span…: or, swaddled with their hands?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.13</a>
 <span class="ft">arrows: Heb. sons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">bitterness: Heb. bitternesses</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">covered…: or, rolled me in the ashes</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">prosperity: Heb. good</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_19"><span class="notemark">**</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">Remembering: or, Remember</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_20"><span class="notemark">††</span> 3.20</a>
 <span class="ft">humbled: Heb. bowed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_21"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 3.21</a>
 <span class="ft">recall…: Heb. make to return to my heart</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_33"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 3.33</a>
 <span class="ft">willingly: Heb. from his heart</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_35"><span class="notemark">***</span> 3.35</a>
 <span class="ft">the most High: or, a superior</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_36"><span class="notemark">†††</span> 3.36</a>
 <span class="ft">approveth not: or, seeth not</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_39"><span class="notemark">‡‡‡</span> 3.39</a>
 <span class="ft">complain: or, murmur</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_51"><span class="notemark">§§§</span> 3.51</a>
 <span class="ft">mine heart: Heb. my soul</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.51</a>
 <span class="ft">because…: or, more than all</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM3_65"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.65</a>
 <span class="ft">sorrow…: or, obstinacy of heart</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4.3</a>
 <span class="ft">sea…: or, sea calves</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4.6</a>
 <span class="ft">punishment of the iniquity: or, iniquity</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4.8</a>
 <span class="ft">blacker…: Heb. darker than blackness</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_9"><span class="notemark">§</span> 4.9</a>
 <span class="ft">pine…: Heb. flow out</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_14"><span class="notemark">**</span> 4.14</a>
 <span class="ft">so…: or, in that they could not but touch</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_15"><span class="notemark">††</span> 4.15</a>
 <span class="ft">it…: or, ye polluted</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_16"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 4.16</a>
 <span class="ft">anger: or, face</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_22"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">The…: or, Thine iniquity</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM4_22"><span class="notemark">***</span> 4.22</a>
 <span class="ft">discover…: or, carry thee captive for thy sins</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5.4</a>
 <span class="ft">is…: Heb. cometh for price</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5.5</a>
 <span class="ft">Our…: Heb. On our necks are we persecuted</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5.10</a>
 <span class="ft">terrible: or, terrors, or, storms</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_16"><span class="notemark">§</span> 5.16</a>
 <span class="ft">The…: Heb. The crown of our head is fallen</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_20"><span class="notemark">**</span> 5.20</a>
 <span class="ft">so…: Heb. for length of days?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LM5_22"><span class="notemark">††</span> 5.22</a>
 <span class="ft">But…: or, For wilt thou utterly reject us?</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
