<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Malachi 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Malachi</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MAL.xhtml#ML4_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='ML0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Malachi  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="ML1_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of the word of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> to Israel by Malachi.<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_2">2&#160;</span> I have loved you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? <span class='add'>Was</span> not Esau Jacob’s brother? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: yet I loved Jacob, 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_3">3&#160;</span> And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_4">4&#160;</span> Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and, The people against whom the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath indignation for ever. 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_5">5&#160;</span> And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will be magnified from the border of Israel.<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML1_6">6&#160;</span>¶ A son honoureth <span class='add'>his</span> father, and a servant his master: if then I <span class='add'>be</span> a father, where <span class='add'>is</span> mine honour? and if I <span class='add'>be</span> a master, where <span class='add'>is</span> my fear? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name? 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_7">7&#160;</span> Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> contemptible.<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_8">8&#160;</span> And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, <span class='add'>is it</span> not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, <span class='add'>is it</span> not evil? offer it now unto thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_9">9&#160;</span> And now, I pray you, beseech God that he will be gracious unto us: this hath been by your means: will he regard your persons? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a><a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_10">10&#160;</span>Who <span class='add'>is there</span> even among you that would shut the doors <span class='add'>for nought?</span> neither do ye kindle <span class='add'>fire</span> on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure in you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_11">11&#160;</span> For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name <span class='add'>shall be</span> great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense <span class='add'>shall be</span> offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name <span class='add'>shall be</span> great among the heathen, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML1_12">12&#160;</span>¶ But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> polluted; and the fruit thereof, <span class='add'>even</span> his meat, <span class='add'>is</span> contemptible. 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_13">13&#160;</span> Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness <span class='add'>is it!</span> and ye have snuffed at it, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; and ye brought <span class='add'>that which was</span> torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hand? saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>.<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML1_14">14&#160;</span> But cursed <span class='add'>be</span> the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I <span class='add'>am</span> a great King, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and my name <span class='add'>is</span> dreadful among the heathen.<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_1">1&#160;</span> And now, O ye priests, this commandment <span class='add'>is</span> for you. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_2">2&#160;</span> If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay <span class='add'>it</span> to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay <span class='add'>it</span> to heart. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_3">3&#160;</span> Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, <span class='add'>even</span> the dung of your solemn feasts; and <span class='add'>one</span> shall take you away with it.<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_4">4&#160;</span> And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_5">5&#160;</span> My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him <span class='add'>for</span> the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_6">6&#160;</span> The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_7">7&#160;</span> For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he <span class='add'>is</span> the messenger of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_8">8&#160;</span> But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_9">9&#160;</span> Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law.<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_10">10&#160;</span> Have we not all one father? hath not one God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_11">11&#160;</span>¶ Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> which he loved, and hath married the daughter of a strange god.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_12">12&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will cut off the man that doeth this, the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offereth an offering unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_13">13&#160;</span> And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth <span class='add'>it</span> with good will at your hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet <span class='add'>is</span> she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_15">15&#160;</span> And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a><a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML2_16">16&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth putting away: for <span class='add'>one</span> covereth violence with his garment, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡‡</a><a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§§</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML2_17">17&#160;</span>¶ Ye have wearied the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied <span class='add'>him?</span> When ye say, Every one that doeth evil <span class='add'>is</span> good in the sight of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and he delighteth in them; or, Where <span class='add'>is</span> the God of judgment?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_1">1&#160;</span> Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_2">2&#160;</span> But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he <span class='add'>is</span> like a refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap: 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_3">3&#160;</span> And he shall sit <span class='add'>as</span> a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> an offering in righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_4">4&#160;</span> Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, as in the days of old, and as in former years.<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_5">5&#160;</span> And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in <span class='add'>his</span> wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger <span class='add'>from his right</span>, and fear not me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_6">6&#160;</span>For I <span class='add'>am</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept <span class='add'>them</span>. Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shall we return? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ Will a man rob God? Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_9">9&#160;</span>Ye <span class='add'>are</span> cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, <span class='add'>even</span> this whole nation. 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_10">10&#160;</span> Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that <span class='add'>there shall</span> not <span class='add'>be room</span> enough <span class='add'>to receive it</span>.<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_11">11&#160;</span> And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts.<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_12">12&#160;</span> And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Your words have been stout against me, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>. Yet ye say, What have we spoken <span class='add'>so much</span> against thee? 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_14">14&#160;</span> Ye have said, It <span class='add'>is</span> vain to serve God: and what profit <span class='add'>is it</span> that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts?<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a><a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_15">15&#160;</span> And now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, <span class='add'>they that</span> tempt God are even delivered.<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML3_16">16&#160;</span>¶ Then they that feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> spake often one to another: and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hearkened, and heard <span class='add'>it</span>, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, and that thought upon his name. 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_17">17&#160;</span> And they shall be mine, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth  his own son that serveth him.<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="ML3_18">18&#160;</span> Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='ML4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_1">1&#160;</span> For, behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_2">2&#160;</span>¶ But unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise  with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. 
<span class="verse" id="ML4_3">3&#160;</span> And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do <span class='add'>this</span>, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, <span class='add'>with</span> the statutes and judgments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ML4_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>: 
<span class="verse" id="ML4_6">6&#160;</span> And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.1</a>
 <span class="ft">by…: Heb. by the hand of</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.5</a>
 <span class="ft">from: or, upon: Heb. from upon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">offer…: or, bring unto, etc</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_8"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1.8</a>
 <span class="ft">for: Heb. to</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_9"><span class="notemark">**</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">God: Heb. the face of God</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_9"><span class="notemark">††</span> 1.9</a>
 <span class="ft">by…: Heb. from your hand</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_13"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 1.13</a>
 <span class="ft">and ye have…: or, whereas ye might have blown it away</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML1_14"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 1.14</a>
 <span class="ft">which…: Heb. in whose flock is</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">corrupt: or, reprove</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">spread: Heb. scatter</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">one…: or, it shall take you away to it</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_8"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">stumble at: or, fall in</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_9"><span class="notemark">**</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">have been…: or, lifted up the face against: Heb. accepted faces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_11"><span class="notemark">††</span> 2.11</a>
 <span class="ft">loved: or, ought to love</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_12"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 2.12</a>
 <span class="ft">the master…: or, him that waketh, and him that answereth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_15"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">residue: or, excellency</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_15"><span class="notemark">***</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">godly…: Heb. seed of God</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_15"><span class="notemark">†††</span> 2.15</a>
 <span class="ft">treacherously: or, unfaithfully</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_16"><span class="notemark">‡‡‡</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">that he…: or, if he hate her, put her away</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML2_16"><span class="notemark">§§§</span> 2.16</a>
 <span class="ft">putting…: Heb. to put away</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.4</a>
 <span class="ft">former: or, ancient</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.5</a>
 <span class="ft">oppress: or, defraud</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.10</a>
 <span class="ft">pour…: Heb. empty out</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_11"><span class="notemark">§</span> 3.11</a>
 <span class="ft">destroy: Heb. corrupt</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_14"><span class="notemark">**</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">ordinance: Heb. observation</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_14"><span class="notemark">††</span> 3.14</a>
 <span class="ft">mournfully: Heb. in black</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_15"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 3.15</a>
 <span class="ft">are set up: Heb. are built</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#ML3_17"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 3.17</a>
 <span class="ft">jewels: or, special treasure</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
