<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Nahum 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Nahum</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='NAM.xhtml#NM1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='NAM.xhtml#NM2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='NAM.xhtml#NM3_0'>3</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='NM0_0'>

<div class='mt'>Nahum  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NM1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="NM1_1">1&#160;</span> The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NM1_2">2&#160;</span> God <span class='add'>is</span> jealous, and the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> revengeth; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> revengeth, and <span class='add'>is</span> furious; the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth <span class='add'>wrath</span> for his enemies.<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><span class='nd'></span><a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_3">3&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit <span class='add'>the wicked:</span> the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds <span class='add'>are</span> the dust of his feet. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_4">4&#160;</span> He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_5">5&#160;</span> The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_6">6&#160;</span> Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_7">7&#160;</span> The <span class='nd'>LORD</span> <span class='add'>is</span> good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_8">8&#160;</span> But with an overrunning flood he will make an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NM1_9">9&#160;</span> What do ye imagine against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>? he will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_10">10&#160;</span>For while <span class='add'>they be</span> folden together <span class='add'>as</span> thorns, and while they are drunken <span class='add'>as</span> drunkards, they shall be devoured as stubble fully dry. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_11">11&#160;</span>There is <span class='add'>one</span> come out of thee, that imagineth evil against the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>, a wicked counsellor.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_12">12&#160;</span> Thus saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span>; Though <span class='add'>they be</span> quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall pass through. Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_13">13&#160;</span> For now will I break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds in sunder. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_14">14&#160;</span> And the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath given a commandment concerning thee, <span class='add'>that</span> no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods will I cut off the graven image and the molten image: I will make thy grave; for thou art vile. 
<span class="verse" id="NM1_15">15&#160;</span> Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass through thee; he is utterly cut off.<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NM2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NM2_1">1&#160;</span> He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: keep the munition, watch the way, make <span class='add'>thy</span> loins strong, fortify <span class='add'>thy</span> power mightily.<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_2">2&#160;</span> For the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> hath turned away the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_3">3&#160;</span> The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men <span class='add'>are</span> in scarlet: the chariots <span class='add'>shall be</span> with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir trees shall be terribly shaken.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_4">4&#160;</span> The chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_5">5&#160;</span> He shall recount his worthies: they shall stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and the defence shall be prepared.<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_6">6&#160;</span> The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall be dissolved.<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_7">7&#160;</span> And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead <span class='add'>her</span> as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>***</a><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_8">8&#160;</span> But Nineveh <span class='add'>is</span> of old like a pool of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, <span class='add'>shall they cry;</span> but none shall look back.<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡‡</a><a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§§§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_9">9&#160;</span> Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for <span class='add'>there is</span> none end of the store <span class='add'>and</span> glory out of all the pleasant furniture.<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_10">10&#160;</span> She is empty, and void, and waste: and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain <span class='add'>is</span> in all loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NM2_11">11&#160;</span>Where <span class='add'>is</span> the dwelling of the lions, and the feedingplace of the young lions, where the lion, <span class='add'>even</span> the old lion, walked, <span class='add'>and</span> the lion’s whelp, and none made <span class='add'>them</span> afraid? 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_12">12&#160;</span> The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. 
<span class="verse" id="NM2_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions: and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='NM3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NM3_1">1&#160;</span> Woe to the bloody city! it <span class='add'>is</span> all full of lies <span class='add'>and</span> robbery; the prey departeth not;<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_2">2&#160;</span> The noise of a whip, and the noise of the rattling of the wheels, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_3">3&#160;</span> The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the glittering spear: and <span class='add'>there is</span> a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases; and <span class='add'>there is</span> none end of <span class='add'>their</span> corpses; they stumble upon their corpses:<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_4">4&#160;</span> Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the wellfavoured harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, I <span class='add'>am</span> against thee, saith the <span class='nd'>LORD</span> of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_6">6&#160;</span> And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_7">7&#160;</span>And it shall come to pass, <span class='add'>that</span> all they that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste: who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="NM3_8">8&#160;</span> Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers, <span class='add'>that had</span> the waters round about it, whose rampart <span class='add'>was</span> the sea, <span class='add'>and</span> her wall <span class='add'>was</span> from the sea?<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_9">9&#160;</span> Ethiopia and Egypt <span class='add'>were</span> her strength, and <span class='add'>it was</span> infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_10">10&#160;</span>Yet <span class='add'>was</span> she carried away, she went into captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets: and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great men were bound in chains. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_11">11&#160;</span> Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of the enemy. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_12">12&#160;</span> All thy strong holds <span class='add'>shall be like</span> fig trees with the firstripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_13">13&#160;</span> Behold, thy people in the midst of thee <span class='add'>are</span> women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies: the fire shall devour thy bars. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_14">14&#160;</span> Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make strong the brickkiln. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_15">15&#160;</span> There shall the fire devour thee; the sword shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like the cankerworm: make thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself many as the locusts. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_16">16&#160;</span> Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the cankerworm spoileth, and flieth away.<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>**</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_17">17&#160;</span> Thy crowned <span class='add'>are</span> as the locusts, and thy captains as the great grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, <span class='add'>but</span> when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not known where they <span class='add'>are</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_18">18&#160;</span> Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria: thy nobles shall dwell <span class='add'>in the dust:</span> thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathereth <span class='add'>them</span>.<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>††</a> 
<span class="verse" id="NM3_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='add'>There is</span> no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡‡</a> </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">God…: or, The LORD is a jealous God, and a revenger, etc</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1.2</a>
 <span class="ft">is furious: Heb. that hath fury</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1.6</a>
 <span class="ft">abide: Heb. stand up</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_7"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1.7</a>
 <span class="ft">strong hold: or, strength</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_11"><span class="notemark">**</span> 1.11</a>
 <span class="ft">a wicked…: Heb. a counsellor of Belial</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_12"><span class="notemark">††</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">Though…: or, If they would have been at peace, so should they have been many, and so should they have been shorn, and he should have passed away</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_12"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 1.12</a>
 <span class="ft">cut down: Heb. shorn</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_15"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">keep…: Heb. feast</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM1_15"><span class="notemark">***</span> 1.15</a>
 <span class="ft">the wicked: Heb. Belial</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.1</a>
 <span class="ft">He…: or, The disperser, or, hammer</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.2</a>
 <span class="ft">the excellency of Jacob…: or, the pride of Jacob as the pride, etc</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_3"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">in scarlet: or, dyed scarlet</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_3"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2.3</a>
 <span class="ft">flaming: or, fiery</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_4"><span class="notemark">**</span> 2.4</a>
 <span class="ft">they: Heb. their show</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_5"><span class="notemark">††</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">worthies: or, gallants</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_5"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 2.5</a>
 <span class="ft">defence: Heb. covering, or, coverer</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_6"><span class="notemark">§§</span> 2.6</a>
 <span class="ft">dissolved: or, molten</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_7"><span class="notemark">***</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">Huzzab: or, that which was established, or, there was a stand made</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_7"><span class="notemark">†††</span> 2.7</a>
 <span class="ft">led…: or, discovered</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_8"><span class="notemark">‡‡‡</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">of old: or, from the days that she hath been</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_8"><span class="notemark">§§§</span> 2.8</a>
 <span class="ft">look back: or, cause them to turn</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">for…: or, and their infinite store, etc</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM2_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2.9</a>
 <span class="ft">pleasant…: Heb. vessels of desire</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3.1</a>
 <span class="ft">bloody…: Heb. city of bloods</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3.3</a>
 <span class="ft">the bright…: Heb. the flame of the sword, and the lightning of the spear</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3.8</a>
 <span class="ft">populous…: or, nourishing, etc: Heb. No Amon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_9"><span class="notemark">§</span> 3.9</a>
 <span class="ft">thy helpers: Heb. in thy help</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_16"><span class="notemark">**</span> 3.16</a>
 <span class="ft">spoileth: or, spreadeth himself</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_18"><span class="notemark">††</span> 3.18</a>
 <span class="ft">nobles: or, valiant ones</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#NM3_19"><span class="notemark">‡‡</span> 3.19</a>
 <span class="ft">healing: Heb. wrinkling</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
