<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>King James Version + Apocrypha Esther 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Esther</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='EST.xhtml#ET10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='ET0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Book of Esther  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="ET1_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this <span class='add'>is</span> Ahasuerus which reigned, from India even unto Ethiopia, <span class='add'>over</span> an hundred and seven and twenty provinces:) 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='add'>That</span> in those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which <span class='add'>was</span> in Shushan the palace, 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_3">3&#160;</span> In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes of the provinces, <span class='add'>being</span> before him: 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_4">4&#160;</span> When he shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honour of his excellent majesty many days, <span class='add'>even</span> an hundred and fourscore days. 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_5">5&#160;</span> And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all the people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king’s palace;
<span class="verse" id="ET1_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Where were</span> white, green, and blue, <span class='add'>hangings</span>, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble: the beds <span class='add'>were of</span> gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black, marble.
<span class="verse" id="ET1_7">7&#160;</span>And they gave <span class='add'>them</span> drink in vessels of gold, (the vessels being diverse one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, according to the state of the king.
<span class="verse" id="ET1_8">8&#160;</span> And the drinking <span class='add'>was</span> according to the law; none did compel: for so the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they should do according to every man’s pleasure. 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_9">9&#160;</span> Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women <span class='add'>in</span> the royal house which <span class='add'>belonged</span> to king Ahasuerus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET1_10">10&#160;</span>¶ On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
<span class="verse" id="ET1_11">11&#160;</span> To bring Vashti the queen before the king with the crown royal, to shew the people and the princes her beauty: for she <span class='add'>was</span> fair to look on.
<span class="verse" id="ET1_12">12&#160;</span> But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king’s commandment by <span class='add'>his</span> chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in him.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET1_13">13&#160;</span>¶ Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so <span class='add'>was</span> the king’s manner toward all that knew law and judgment: 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_14">14&#160;</span> And the next unto him <span class='add'>was</span> Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, <span class='add'>and</span> Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king’s face, <span class='add'>and</span> which sat the first in the kingdom;) 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_15">15&#160;</span> What shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to law, because she hath not performed the commandment of the king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?
<span class="verse" id="ET1_16">16&#160;</span> And Memucan answered before the king and the princes, Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to all the princes, and to all the people that <span class='add'>are</span> in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus. 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_17">17&#160;</span>For <span class='add'>this</span> deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so that they shall despise their husbands in their eyes, when it shall be reported, The king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought in before him, but she came not. 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='add'>Likewise</span> shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto all the king’s princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen. Thus <span class='add'>shall there arise</span> too much contempt and wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_19">19&#160;</span> If it please the king, let there go a royal commandment from him, and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is better than she.
<span class="verse" id="ET1_20">20&#160;</span> And when the king’s decree which he shall make shall be published throughout all his empire, (for it is great,) all the wives shall give to their husbands honour, both to great and small. 
<span class="verse" id="ET1_21">21&#160;</span> And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did according to the word of Memucan:
<span class="verse" id="ET1_22">22&#160;</span> For he sent letters into all the king’s provinces, into every province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and that <span class='add'>it</span> should be published according to the language of every people.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_1">1&#160;</span> After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against her. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_2">2&#160;</span> Then said the king’s servants that ministered unto him, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king: 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_3">3&#160;</span> And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the king’s chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their things for purification be given <span class='add'>them:</span>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_4">4&#160;</span> And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be queen instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_5">5&#160;</span>¶ <span class='add'>Now</span> in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name <span class='add'>was</span> Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite; 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_6">6&#160;</span> Who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity which had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.
<span class="verse" id="ET2_7">7&#160;</span> And he brought up Hadassah, that <span class='add'>is</span>, Esther, his uncle’s daughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid <span class='add'>was</span> fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took for his own daughter.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_8">8&#160;</span>¶ So it came to pass, when the king’s commandment and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the palace, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought also unto the king’s house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_9">9&#160;</span> And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him; and he speedily gave her her things for purification, with such things as belonged to her, and seven maidens, <span class='add'>which were</span> meet to be given her, out of the king’s house: and he preferred her and her maids unto the best <span class='add'>place</span> of the house of the women.
<span class="verse" id="ET2_10">10&#160;</span> Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai had charged her that she should not shew <span class='add'>it</span>. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_11">11&#160;</span> And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women’s house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_12">12&#160;</span>¶ Now when every maid’s turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, <span class='add'>to wit</span>, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours, and with <span class='add'>other</span> things for the purifying of the women;) 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_13">13&#160;</span> Then thus came <span class='add'>every</span> maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the women unto the king’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_14">14&#160;</span> In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king’s chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king’s chamberlain, the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favour in the sight of all them that looked upon her. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_16">16&#160;</span> So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in the tenth month, which <span class='add'>is</span> the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_17">17&#160;</span> And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of Vashti.
<span class="verse" id="ET2_18">18&#160;</span> Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his servants, <span class='add'>even</span> Esther’s feast; and he made a release to the provinces, and gave gifts, according to the state of the king.
<span class="verse" id="ET2_19">19&#160;</span> And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai sat in the king’s gate. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_20">20&#160;</span> Esther had not <span class='add'>yet</span> shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai had charged her: for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET2_21">21&#160;</span>¶ In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king’s gate, two of the king’s chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.
<span class="verse" id="ET2_22">22&#160;</span> And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told <span class='add'>it</span> unto Esther the queen; and Esther certified the king <span class='add'>thereof</span> in Mordecai’s name. 
<span class="verse" id="ET2_23">23&#160;</span> And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out; therefore they were both hanged on a tree: and it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET3_1">1&#160;</span> After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes that <span class='add'>were</span> with him. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_2">2&#160;</span> And all the king’s servants, that <span class='add'>were</span> in the king’s gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did <span class='add'>him</span> reverence. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_3">3&#160;</span> Then the king’s servants, which <span class='add'>were</span> in the king’s gate, said unto Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king’s commandment? 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_4">4&#160;</span> Now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not unto them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai’s matters would stand: for he had told them that he <span class='add'>was</span> a Jew. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_5">5&#160;</span> And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was Haman full of wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_6">6&#160;</span> And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, <span class='add'>even</span> the people of Mordecai. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET3_7">7&#160;</span>¶ In the first month, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, <span class='add'>to</span> the twelfth <span class='add'>month</span>, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the month Adar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET3_8">8&#160;</span>¶ And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws <span class='add'>are</span> diverse from all people; neither keep they the king’s laws: therefore it <span class='add'>is</span> not for the king’s profit to suffer them.
<span class="verse" id="ET3_9">9&#160;</span> If it please the king, let it be written that they may be destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the business, to bring <span class='add'>it</span> into the king’s treasuries.
<span class="verse" id="ET3_10">10&#160;</span> And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ enemy.
<span class="verse" id="ET3_11">11&#160;</span> And the king said unto Haman, The silver <span class='add'>is</span> given to thee, the people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_12">12&#160;</span> Then were the king’s scribes called on the thirteenth day of the first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had commanded unto the king’s lieutenants, and to the governors that <span class='add'>were</span> over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every province according to the writing thereof, and <span class='add'>to</span> every people after their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it written, and sealed with the king’s ring.
<span class="verse" id="ET3_13">13&#160;</span> And the letters were sent by posts into all the king’s provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little children and women, in one day, <span class='add'>even</span> upon the thirteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and <span class='add'>to take</span> the spoil of them for a prey. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_14">14&#160;</span> The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every province was published unto all people, that they should be ready against that day. 
<span class="verse" id="ET3_15">15&#160;</span> The posts went out, being hastened by the king’s commandment, and the decree was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET4_1">1&#160;</span> When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry; 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_2">2&#160;</span> And came even before the king’s gate: for none <span class='add'>might</span> enter into the king’s gate clothed with sackcloth. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_3">3&#160;</span> And in every province, whithersoever the king’s commandment and his decree came, <span class='add'>there was</span> great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET4_4">4&#160;</span>¶ So Esther’s maids and her chamberlains came and told <span class='add'>it</span> her. Then was the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received <span class='add'>it</span> not.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET4_5">5&#160;</span> Then called Esther for Hatach, <span class='add'>one</span> of the king’s chamberlains, whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment to Mordecai, to know what it <span class='add'>was</span>, and why it <span class='add'>was</span>.
<span class="verse" id="ET4_6">6&#160;</span> So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city, which <span class='add'>was</span> before the king’s gate. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_7">7&#160;</span> And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king’s treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_8">8&#160;</span> Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew <span class='add'>it</span> unto Esther, and to declare <span class='add'>it</span> unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the king, to make supplication unto him, and to make request before him for her people. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_9">9&#160;</span> And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET4_10">10&#160;</span>¶ Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him commandment unto Mordecai; 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_11">11&#160;</span> All the king’s servants, and the people of the king’s provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or woman, shall come unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, <span class='add'>there is</span> one law of his to put <span class='add'>him</span> to death, except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been called to come in unto the king these thirty days. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_12">12&#160;</span> And they told to Mordecai Esther’s words. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_13">13&#160;</span> Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself that thou shalt escape in the king’s house, more than all the Jews. 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_14">14&#160;</span> For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, <span class='add'>then</span> shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place; but thou and thy father’s house shall be destroyed: and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for <span class='add'>such</span> a time as this?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET4_15">15&#160;</span>¶ Then Esther bade <span class='add'>them</span> return Mordecai <span class='add'>this answer</span>, 
<span class="verse" id="ET4_16">16&#160;</span> Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king, which <span class='add'>is</span> not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish.
<span class="verse" id="ET4_17">17&#160;</span> So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther had commanded him.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET5_1">1&#160;</span> Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on <span class='add'>her</span> royal <span class='add'>apparel</span>, and stood in the inner court of the king’s house, over against the king’s house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, over against the gate of the house. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_2">2&#160;</span> And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court, <span class='add'>that</span> she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre that <span class='add'>was</span> in his hand. So Esther drew near, and touched the top of the sceptre. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_3">3&#160;</span> Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, queen Esther? and what <span class='add'>is</span> thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_4">4&#160;</span> And Esther answered, If <span class='add'>it seem</span> good unto the king, let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_5">5&#160;</span> Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET5_6">6&#160;</span>¶ And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what <span class='add'>is</span> thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_7">7&#160;</span> Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request <span class='add'>is;</span> 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_8">8&#160;</span> If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do to morrow as the king hath said.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET5_9">9&#160;</span>¶ Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king’s gate, that he stood not up, nor moved for him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_10">10&#160;</span> Nevertheless Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife.
<span class="verse" id="ET5_11">11&#160;</span> And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and all <span class='add'>the things</span> wherein the king had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_12">12&#160;</span> Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and to morrow am I invited unto her also with the king. 
<span class="verse" id="ET5_13">13&#160;</span> Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king’s gate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET5_14">14&#160;</span>¶ Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused the gallows to be made.</div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET6_1">1&#160;</span> On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king.
<span class="verse" id="ET6_2">2&#160;</span> And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus.
<span class="verse" id="ET6_3">3&#160;</span> And the king said, What honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this? Then said the king’s servants that ministered unto him, There is nothing done for him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET6_4">4&#160;</span>¶ And the king said, Who <span class='add'>is</span> in the court? Now Haman was come into the outward court of the king’s house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him. 
<span class="verse" id="ET6_5">5&#160;</span> And the king’s servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in the court. And the king said, Let him come in. 
<span class="verse" id="ET6_6">6&#160;</span> So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself?
<span class="verse" id="ET6_7">7&#160;</span> And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delighteth to honour,
<span class="verse" id="ET6_8">8&#160;</span> Let the royal apparel be brought which the king <span class='add'>useth</span> to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head:
<span class="verse" id="ET6_9">9&#160;</span> And let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king’s most noble princes, that they may array the man <span class='add'>withal</span> whom the king delighteth to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour.
<span class="verse" id="ET6_10">10&#160;</span> Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, <span class='add'>and</span> take the apparel and the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that sitteth at the king’s gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken.
<span class="verse" id="ET6_11">11&#160;</span> Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET6_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And Mordecai came again to the king’s gate. But Haman hasted to his house mourning, and having his head covered. 
<span class="verse" id="ET6_13">13&#160;</span> And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every <span class='add'>thing</span> that had befallen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, If Mordecai <span class='add'>be</span> of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely fall before him. 
<span class="verse" id="ET6_14">14&#160;</span>And while they <span class='add'>were</span> yet talking with him, came the king’s chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther had prepared.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET7_1">1&#160;</span> So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.
<span class="verse" id="ET7_2">2&#160;</span> And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, What <span class='add'>is</span> thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee: and what <span class='add'>is</span> thy request? and it shall be performed, <span class='add'>even</span> to the half of the kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="ET7_3">3&#160;</span> Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favour in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request: 
<span class="verse" id="ET7_4">4&#160;</span> For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king’s damage.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET7_5">5&#160;</span>¶ Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?
<span class="verse" id="ET7_6">6&#160;</span> And Esther said, The adversary and enemy <span class='add'>is</span> this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET7_7">7&#160;</span>¶ And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath <span class='add'>went</span> into the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king. 
<span class="verse" id="ET7_8">8&#160;</span> Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther <span class='add'>was</span>. Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me in the house? As the word went out of the king’s mouth, they covered Haman’s face.
<span class="verse" id="ET7_9">9&#160;</span> And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who had spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon.
<span class="verse" id="ET7_10">10&#160;</span> So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the king’s wrath pacified.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET8_1">1&#160;</span> On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews’ enemy unto Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king; for Esther had told what he <span class='add'>was</span> unto her. 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_2">2&#160;</span> And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET8_3">3&#160;</span>¶ And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews.
<span class="verse" id="ET8_4">4&#160;</span> Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther arose, and stood before the king, 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_5">5&#160;</span> And said, If it please the king, and if I have found favour in his sight, and the thing <span class='add'>seem</span> right before the king, and I <span class='add'>be</span> pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which <span class='add'>are</span> in all the king’s provinces:
<span class="verse" id="ET8_6">6&#160;</span> For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET8_7">7&#160;</span>¶ Then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews. 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_8">8&#160;</span> Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king’s name, and seal <span class='add'>it</span> with the king’s ring: for the writing which is written in the king’s name, and sealed with the king’s ring, may no man reverse. 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_9">9&#160;</span> Then were the king’s scribes called at that time in the third month, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth <span class='add'>day</span> thereof; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of the provinces which <span class='add'>are</span> from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven provinces, unto every province according to the writing thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews according to their writing, and according to their language. 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_10">10&#160;</span> And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus’ name, and sealed <span class='add'>it</span> with the king’s ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, <span class='add'>and</span> riders on mules, camels, <span class='add'>and</span> young dromedaries: 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_11">11&#160;</span> Wherein the king granted the Jews which <span class='add'>were</span> in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, all the power of the people and province that would assault them, <span class='add'>both</span> little ones and women, and <span class='add'>to take</span> the spoil of them for a prey, 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_12">12&#160;</span> Upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, <span class='add'>namely</span>, upon the thirteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the twelfth month, which <span class='add'>is</span> the month Adar. 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_13">13&#160;</span> The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every province <span class='add'>was</span> published unto all people, and that the Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.
<span class="verse" id="ET8_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='add'>So</span> the posts that rode upon mules <span class='add'>and</span> camels went out, being hastened and pressed on by the king’s commandment. And the decree was given at Shushan the palace. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET8_15">15&#160;</span>¶ And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a garment of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad.
<span class="verse" id="ET8_16">16&#160;</span> The Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour. 
<span class="verse" id="ET8_17">17&#160;</span> And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the king’s commandment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and gladness, a feast and a good day. And many of the people of the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET9_1">1&#160;</span> Now in the twelfth month, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the same, when the king’s commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;) 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_2">2&#160;</span> The Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon all people. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_3">3&#160;</span> And all the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the deputies, and officers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_4">4&#160;</span> For Mordecai <span class='add'>was</span> great in the king’s house, and his fame went out throughout all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and greater. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_5">5&#160;</span> Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that hated them.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_6">6&#160;</span> And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred men. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_7">7&#160;</span> And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_8">8&#160;</span> And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_9">9&#160;</span> And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_10">10&#160;</span> The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_11">11&#160;</span> On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the palace was brought before the king.</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET9_12">12&#160;</span>¶ And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces? now what <span class='add'>is</span> thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what <span class='add'>is</span> thy request further? and it shall be done. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_13">13&#160;</span> Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews which <span class='add'>are</span> in Shushan to do to morrow also according unto this day’s decree, and let Haman’s ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_14">14&#160;</span> And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given at Shushan; and they hanged Haman’s ten sons. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_15">15&#160;</span> For the Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_16">16&#160;</span> But the other Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> in the king’s provinces gathered themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not their hands on the prey, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_17">17&#160;</span> On the thirteenth day of the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same rested they, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_18">18&#160;</span> But the Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> at Shushan assembled together on the thirteenth <span class='add'>day</span> thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the fifteenth <span class='add'>day</span> of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladness. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_19">19&#160;</span> Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled towns, made the fourteenth day of the month Adar <span class='add'>a day of</span> gladness and feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET9_20">20&#160;</span>¶ And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the Jews that <span class='add'>were</span> in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, <span class='add'>both</span> nigh and far, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_21">21&#160;</span> To stablish <span class='add'>this</span> among them, that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_22">22&#160;</span> As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor. 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_23">23&#160;</span> And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had written unto them; 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_24">24&#160;</span> Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, that <span class='add'>is</span>, the lot, to consume them, and to destroy them;
<span class="verse" id="ET9_25">25&#160;</span>But when <span class='add'>Esther</span> came before the king, he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_26">26&#160;</span> Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of this letter, and <span class='add'>of that</span> which they had seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them,
<span class="verse" id="ET9_27">27&#160;</span> The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would keep these two days according to their writing, and according to their <span class='add'>appointed</span> time every year;
<span class="verse" id="ET9_28">28&#160;</span>And <span class='add'>that</span> these days <span class='add'>should be</span> remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city; and <span class='add'>that</span> these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their seed.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_29">29&#160;</span> Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_30">30&#160;</span> And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, <span class='add'>with</span> words of peace and truth, 
<span class="verse" id="ET9_31">31&#160;</span> To confirm these days of Purim in their times <span class='add'>appointed</span>, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their seed, the matters of the fastings and their cry.
<span class="verse" id="ET9_32">32&#160;</span> And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it was written in the book.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='ET10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="ET10_1">1&#160;</span> And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and <span class='add'>upon</span> the isles of the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="ET10_2">2&#160;</span> And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, <span class='add'>are</span> they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?
<span class="verse" id="ET10_3">3&#160;</span> For Mordecai the Jew <span class='add'>was</span> next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
